<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Church History, Vol. 3 of 3</title>
      <author><name reg="Kurtz, J. H.">J. H. Kurtz</name></author>
      <respStmt><resp>Translated by</resp> <name>John MacPherson</name></respStmt>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="2">Edition 2</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>September 11, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">37404</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="ja"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="it"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="sv"></language>
      <language id="es"></language>
      <language id="pt"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-09-11">September 11, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Church History</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Professor J. H. Kurtz</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Authorized Translation From Latest Revised Edition by the</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Rev. John MacPherson, M.A.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">In Three Volumes. Vol. III.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Second Edition</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London: Hodder and Stoughton</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1893</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Second Section. Church History Of The Seventeenth
Century.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Relations between the Different Churches.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 152. East and West.</head>

<p>
The papacy formed new plans for conquest in the domain
of the Eastern church, but with at most only transient
success. Still more illusory were the hopes entertained for
a while in Geneva and London in regard to the Calvinizing
of the Greek church.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_152_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Roman Catholic Hopes.</emph>&mdash;The Jesuit missions among the Turks
and schismatic Greeks failed, but among the Abyssinians some progress
was made. By promising Spanish aid, the Jesuit Paez succeeded,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1621, in inducing the Sultan Segued to abjure the Jacobite
heresy. Mendez was made Abyssinian patriarch by Urban VIII. in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1626, but the clergy and people repeatedly rebelled against sultan
and patriarch. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1642 the next sultan drove the Jesuits out of
his kingdom, and in it henceforth no traces of Catholicism were to be
found.&mdash;In Russia the false Demetrius, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1605, working in Polish
Catholic interests, sought to catholicize the empire; but this only
convinced the Russians that he was no true czar's son. When his
Catholic Polish bride entered Moscow with 200 Poles, a riot ensued,
in which Demetrius lost his life.<note place='foot'>Merimée, <q>The Russian Impostors: the False Demetrius,</q> London,
1852.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_152_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Calvinistic Hopes.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Cyril Lucar</emph>, a native of Crete, then under
Venetian rule, by long residence in Geneva had come to entertain a
strong liking to the Reformed church. Expelled from his situation
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
as rector of a Greek seminary at Ostrog by Jesuit machinations, he
was made Patriarch of Alexandria in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1602 and of Constantinople
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1621. He maintained a regular correspondence with Reformed
divines in Holland, Switzerland, and England. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1628 he sent
the famous Codex Alexandrinus as a present to James I. He wrought
expressly for a union of the Greek and Reformed churches, and for
this end sent, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1629, to Geneva an almost purely Calvinistic
confession. But the other Greek bishops opposed his union schemes,
and influential Jesuits in Constantinople accused him of political
faults. Four times the sultan deposed and banished him, and at
last, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1638, he was strangled as a traitor and cast into the sea.&mdash;One
of his Alexandrian clergy, Metrophanes Critopulus, whom in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1616 he had sent for his education to England, studied several
years at Oxford, then at German Protestant universities, ending with
Helmstadt, where, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1625, he composed in Greek a confession of
the faith of the Greek Orthodox Church. It was pointedly antagonistic
to the Romish doctrine, conciliatory toward Protestantism,
while abandoning nothing essential in the Greek Orthodox creed,
and showing signs of the possession of independent speculative power.
Afterwards Metrophanes became Patriarch of Alexandria, and in the
synod, presided over by Lucar's successor, Cyril of Berrhoë, at Constantinople
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1638, gave his vote for the formal condemnation
of the man who had been already executed.<note place='foot'>Neale, <q>History of the Holy Eastern Church,</q> vol. ii., p. 356 ff.
Cyrillus Lucaris, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Christianæ Fidei</foreign>.</q> Geneva, 1633. Smith,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collectanea de Cyrillo Lucario</foreign>.</q> London, 1707.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_152_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Orthodox Constancy.</emph>&mdash;The Russian Orthodox church, after its
emancipation from Constantinople and the erection of an independent
patriarchate at Moscow in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1589 (§ 73, 4), had decidedly the pre-eminence
over the Greek Orthodox church, and the Russian czar
took the place formerly occupied by the East Roman emperor as
protector of the whole Orthodox church. The dangers to the Orthodox
faith threatened by schemes of union with Catholics and Protestants
induced the learned metropolitan, Peter Mogilas of Kiev, to compose
a new confession in catechetical form, which, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1643, was formally
authorized by the Orthodox patriarchs as Ὀρθόδοξος ὁμολογία τῆς
καθολικῆς καὶ ἀποστολικῆς ἐκκλησίας τῆς ἀνατολικῆς.&mdash;Thirty years later a
controversy on the eucharist broke out between the Jansenists Nicole
and Arnauld, on the one side, and the Calvinists Claude and Jurieu, on
the other (<ref target='Section_157_Para_1'>§ 157, 1</ref>), in which both claimed to be in agreement with
the Greek church. A synod was convened under <emph>Dositheus of Jerusalem</emph>
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1672, at the instigation of French diplomatists, where
the questions raised by Cyril were again taken into consideration.
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
Maintaining a friendly attitude toward the Romish church, it directed
a violent polemic against Calvinism. In order to save the character
of the Constantinopolitan chair for constant Orthodoxy, Cyril's confession
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1629 was pronounced a spurious, heretical invention,
and a confession composed by Dositheus, in which Cyril's Calvinistic
heresies were repudiated, was incorporated with the synod's acts.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 153. Catholicism and Protestantism.</head>

<p>
The Jesuit counter-reformation (§ 151) was eminently successful
during the first decades of the century in Bohemia.
The Westphalian Peace restrained its violence, but did not
prevent secret machinations and the open exercise of all
conceivable arts of seduction. Next to the conversion of
Bohemia, the greatest triumph of the restoration was won
in France in the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes. Besides
such victories the Catholics were able to glory in the conversion
of several Protestant princes. New endeavours at
union were repeatedly made, but these in every case proved
as fruitless as former attempts had done.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_153_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Conversions of Protestant Princes.</emph>&mdash;The first reigning prince who
became a convert to Romanism was the Margrave <emph>James III. of Baden</emph>.
He went over in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1590 (§ 144, 4), but as his death occurred soon after,
his conduct had little influence upon his people. Of greater consequence
was the conversion, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1614, of the Count-palatine Wolfgang
William of Neuburg, as it prepared the way for the catholicizing of
the whole Palatinate, which followed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1685. Much was made
of the passing over to the Catholic church of <emph>Christina of Sweden</emph>, the
highly gifted but eccentric daughter of Gustavus Adolphus. As she
had resigned the crown, the pope gained no political advantage from
his new member, and Alexander VII. had even to contribute to her
support. The Elector of Saxony, <emph>Frederick Augustus II.</emph>, passed over
to the Roman Catholic church in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1697, in order to qualify himself
for the Polish crown; but the rights of his Protestant subjects were
carefully guarded. An awkwardness arose from the fact that the
prince was pledged by the directory of the Regensburg Diet of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1653 to care for the interests of the evangelical church. Now that he
had become a Catholic, he still formally promised to do so, but had
his duties discharged by a commissioner. Subsequently this officer
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
was ordered to take his directions from the evangelical council of
Dresden.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_153_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Restoration in Germany and the Neighbouring States (§ 151, 1).</emph>&mdash;Matthias
having, in violation of the royal letter of his predecessor
Rudolph II. (§ 139, 19), refused to allow the Protestants of Bohemia
to build churches, was driven out; the Jesuits also were expelled, and
the Calvinistic Elector-palatine Frederick V. was chosen as prince in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1619. Ferdinand II. (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1619-1637) defeated him, tore up the
royal letter, restored the Jesuits, and expelled the Protestant pastors.
Efforts were made by Christian IV. of Denmark and other Protestant
princes to save Protestantism, but without success. Ferdinand now
issued his <emph>Restitution Edict</emph> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1629, which deprived Protestants of
their privileges, and gave to Catholic nobles unrestricted liberty to
suppress the evangelical faith in their dominions. It was then that
Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, in religious not less than political
interests, made his appearance as the saviour of Protestantism.<note place='foot'>Stevens, <q>Life and Times of Gustavus Adolphus.</q> New York,
1884. Trench, <q>Gustavus Adolphus in Germany, and other Lectures
on the Thirty Years' War.</q> London. Gardiner, <q>The Thirty Years'
War</q> in <q>Epochs of Modern History.</q> London, 1881.</note> The
unhappy war was brought to an end in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1648 by the publication
at Münster and Osnabrück of the <emph>Peace of Westphalia</emph>, which Innocent
X. in his bull <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Zelo Domus Dei</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1651 pronounced <q>null and
void, without influence on past, present, and future.</q> Germany lost
several noble provinces, but its intellectual and religious freedom was
saved. Under Swedish and French guarantee the Augsburg Religious
Peace was confirmed and even extended to the Reformed, as related
to the Augsburg Confession. The church property was to be restored
on January 1st, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1624. The political equality of Protestants and
Catholics throughout Germany was distinctly secured. In <emph>Bohemia</emph>,
however, Protestantism was thoroughly extirpated, and in the other
Austrian states the oppression continued down to the time of Joseph
II. In <emph>Silesia</emph>, from the passing of the Restitution Edict, over a
thousand churches had been violently taken from the evangelicals.
No compensation was now thought of, but rather the persecution
continued throughout the whole century (<ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>§ 165, 4</ref>), and many thousands
were compelled to migrate, for the most part to Upper Lusatia.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_153_Para_3'/>
3. Also in <emph>Livonia</emph>, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1561 under Polish rule, the Jesuits
gained a footing and began the restoration, but under Gustavus
Adolphus from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1621 their machinations were brought to an end.&mdash;The
ruthless <emph>Valteline Massacre</emph> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1620 may be described as a
Swiss St. Bartholomew on a small scale. All Protestants were murdered
in one day. The conspirators at a signal from the clock tower
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
in the early morning broke into the houses of heretics, and put all to
death, down to the very babe in the cradle. Between four and five
hundred were slaughtered.&mdash;In <emph>Hungary</emph>, at the close of the preceding
century only three noble families remained Catholic, and the Protestant
churches numbered 2,000; but the Jesuits, who had settled there
under the protection of Rudolph II. in 1579, resumed their intrigues,
and the Archbishop of Gran, Pazmany, wrought hard for the restoration
of Catholicism. Rakoczy of Transylvania, in the Treaty of Linz
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645, concluded a league offensive and defensive with Sweden
and France, which secured political and religious liberty for Hungary;
but of the 400 churches of which the Protestants had been robbed
only ninety were given back. The bigoted Leopold I., from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1655
king of Hungary, inaugurated a yet more severe persecution, which
continued until the publication of the Toleration Edict of Joseph II.
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1781. The 2,000 Protestant congregations were by this time
reduced to 105.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_153_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Huguenots in France (§ 139, 17).</emph>&mdash;Henry IV. faithfully fulfilled
the promises which he made in the Edict of Nantes; but under
Louis XIII., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1610-1643, the oppressions of the Huguenots were
renewed, and led to fresh outbreaks. Richelieu withdrew their
political privileges, but granted them religious toleration in the Edict
of Nismes, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1629. Louis XIV., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1643-1715, at the instigation
of his confessors, sought to atone for his sins by purging his land of
heretics. When bribery and court favour had done all that they
could do in the way of conversions, the fearful dragonnades began,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1681. The formal <emph>Revocation of the Edict of Nantes</emph> followed in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1685, and persecution raged with the utmost violence. Thousands
of churches were torn down, vast numbers of confessors were tortured,
burnt, or sent to the galleys. In spite of the terrible penal laws
against emigrating, in spite of the watch kept over the frontiers,
hundreds of thousands escaped, and were received with open arms as
<emph>refugees</emph> in Brandenburg, Holland, England, Denmark, and Switzerland.
Many fled into the wilds of the Cevennes, where under the
name of Camisards they maintained a heroic conflict for years, until
at last exterminated by an army at least ten times their strength.
The struggle reached the utmost intensity of bitterness on both sides
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1702, when the fanatical and inhumanly cruel inquisitor, the
Abbé du Chaila, was slain. At the head of the Camisard army was a
young peasant, Jean Cavalier, who by his energetic and skilful conduct
of the campaign astonished the world. At last the famous Marshal
Villars, by promising a general amnesty, release of all prisoners,
permission to emigrate with possessions, and religious toleration to
those who remained, succeeded in persuading Cavalier to lay down
his arms. The king ratified this bargain, only refusing the right of
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
religious freedom. Many, however, submitted; while others emigrated,
mostly to England. Cavalier entered the king's service as colonel;
but distrusting the arrangements fled to Holland, and afterwards to
England, where in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1740 he died as governor of Jersey. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1707 a new outbreak took place, accompanied by prophetic fanaticism,
in consequence of repeated dragonnades, but it was put down by the
stake, the gallows, the axe, and the wheel. France had lost half a
million of her most pious, industrious, and capable inhabitants, and
yet two millions of Huguenots deprived of all their rights remained
in the land.<note place='foot'>Bray, <q>Revolt of the Protestants of the Cevennes.</q> London, 1870.
Poole, <q>History of the Huguenots of the Dispersion.</q> London, 1880.
Agnew, <q>Protestant Exiles from France in the Reign of Louis XIV.</q>
3 vols. London, 1871. Weiss, <q>History of French Protestant Refugees.</q>
London, 1854.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_153_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Waldensians in Piedmont (§ 139, 25).</emph>&mdash;Although in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1654
the Duke of Savoy confirmed to the Waldensians their privileges, by
Easter of the following year a bloody persecution broke out, in which
a Piedmontese army, together with a horde of released prisoners and
Irish refugees, driven from their native land by Cromwell's severities,
to whom the duke had given shelter in the valleys, perpetrated the
most horrible cruelties. Yet in the desperate conflict the Waldensians
held their ground. The intervention of the Protestant Swiss cantons
won for them again a measure of toleration, and liberal gifts from
abroad compensated them for their loss of property. Cromwell too
sent to the relief of the sufferers the celebrated Lord Morland in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1658. While in the valleys he got possession of a number of MSS.
(§ 108, 11), which he took home with him and deposited in the Cambridge
Library. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1685 the persecution and civil war were again
renewed at the instigation of Louis XIV. The soldiers besieged the
valleys, and more than 14,000 captives were consigned to fortresses and
prisons. But the rest of the Waldensians plucked up courage, inflicted
many defeats upon their enemy, and so moved the government in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1686 to release the prisoners and send them out of the country.
Some found their way to Germany, others fled to Switzerland. These
last, aided by Swiss troops, and led by their own pastor, Henry
Arnaud, made an attack upon Piedmont in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1689, and conquered
again their own country. They continued in possession, notwithstanding
all attempts to dislodge them.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_153_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The Catholics in England and Ireland.</emph>&mdash;When James I., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1603-1625,
the son of Mary Stuart, ascended the English throne (§ 139, 11),
the Catholics expected from him nothing short of the complete restoration
of the old religion. But great as James' inclination towards
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
Catholicism may have been, his love of despotic authority was still
greater. He therefore rigorously suppressed the Jesuits, who disputed
the royal supremacy over the church; and the bitterness of the
Catholics now reached its height. They organized the so-called
<emph>Gunpowder Plot</emph>, with the intention of blowing up the royal family and
the whole Parliament at the first meeting of the house. At the head
of the conspiracy stood Rob. Catesby, Thomas Percy of Northumberland,
and Guy Fawkes, an English officer in the Spanish service.
The plan was discovered shortly before the day appointed for its
execution. On November 5th, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1605, Fawkes, with lantern and
matches, was seized in the cellar. The rest of the conspirators fled,
but, after a desperate struggle, in which Catesby and Percy fell, were
arrested, and, together with two Jesuit accomplices, executed as traitors.
Great severities were then exercised toward the Catholics, not only in
England, but also in Ireland, where the bulk of the population was
attached to the Romish faith. James I. completed the transference
of ecclesiastical property to the Anglican church, and robbed the
Irish nobles of almost all their estates, and gifted them over to
Scottish and English favourites. All Catholics, because they refused
to take the oath of supremacy, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> to recognise the king as head
of the church, were declared ineligible for any civil office. These
oppressions at last led to the fearful <emph>Irish massacre</emph>. In October, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1641, a desperate outbreak of the Catholics took place throughout the
country. It aimed at the destruction of all Protestants in Ireland.
The conspirators rushed from all sides into the houses of the Protestants,
murdered the inhabitants, and drove them naked and helpless
from their homes. Many thousands died on the roadside of hunger
and cold. In other places they were driven in crowds into the rivers
and drowned, or into empty houses, which were burnt over them.
The number of those who suffered is variously estimated from 40,000 to
400,000. Charles I., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1625-1649, was suspected as instigator of this
terrible deed, and it may be regarded as his first step toward the
scaffold (<ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>§ 155, 1</ref>). After the execution of Charles, Oliver Cromwell, in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1649, at the call of Parliament, took fearful revenge for the Irish
crime. In the two cities which he took by storm he had all the
citizens cut down without distinction. Panic-stricken, the inhabitants
of the other cities fled to the bogs. Within nine months the whole
island was reconquered. Hundreds of thousands, driven from their
native soil, wandered as homeless fugitives, and their lands were
divided among English soldiers and settlers. During the time of the
English Commonwealth, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1649-1660, all moderate men, even those
who had formerly demanded religious toleration, not only for all
Christian sects, but also for Jews and Mohammedans, and even
atheists, were now at one in excluding Catholics from its benefit,
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
because they all saw in the Catholics a party ready at any moment to
prove traitors to their country at the bidding of a foreign sovereign.&mdash;The
Restoration under Charles II. could not greatly ameliorate
the calamities of the Irish. Religious persecution indeed ceased, but
the property taken from the Catholic church and native owners still
remained in the hands of the Anglican church and the Protestant
occupiers. To counterbalance the Catholic proclivities of Charles II.
(<ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>§ 155, 3</ref>), the English Parliament of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1673 passed the <emph>Test Act</emph>,
which required every civil and military officer to take the test oaths,
condemning transubstantiation and the worship of the saints, and to
receive the communion according to the Anglican rite as members of
the State church. The statements of a certain Titus Oates, that the
Jesuits had organized a plot for murdering the king and restoring
the papacy, led to fearful riots in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1678 and many executions.
But the reports were seemingly unfounded, and were probably the
fruit of an intrigue to deprive the king's Catholic brother, James II.,
of the right of succession. When James ascended the throne, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1685, he immediately entered into negotiations with Rome, and filled
almost all offices with Catholics. At the invitation of the Protestants,
the king's son-in-law, William III. of Orange, landed in England in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1688, and on James' flight was declared king by the Parliament.
The Act of Toleration, issued by him in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1689, still withheld from
Papists the privileges now extended to Protestant dissenters (<ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>§ 155, 3</ref>).<note place='foot'>Macaulay, <q>History of England from the Accession of James II.</q>
London, 1846. Hassencamp, <q>History of Ireland from the Reformation
to the Union.</q> London, 1888. Adair, <q>Rise and Progress of
the Presbyterian Church of Ireland from 1623 to 1670.</q> Belfast, 1866.
Hamilton, <q>History of Presbyterian Church in Ireland.</q> Edin., 1887.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_153_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Union Efforts.</emph>&mdash;(1) Although <emph>Hugo Grotius</emph> distinctly took the
side of the Remonstrants (<ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>§ 160, 2</ref>), his whole disposition was essentially
irenical. He attempted, but in vain, not only the reconciliation
of the Arminians and Calvinists, but also the union of all Protestant
sects on a common basis. Toward Catholicism he long maintained
a decidedly hostile attitude. But through intimate intercourse with
distinguished Catholics, especially during his exile in France, his
feelings were completely changed. He now invariably expressed
himself more favourably in regard to the faith and the institutions of
the Catholic church. Its semi-Pelagianism was acceptable to him
as a decided Arminian. In his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Votum pro Pace</foreign></q> he recommended
as the only possible way to restore ecclesiastical union, a return to
Catholicism, on the understanding that a thorough reform should be
made. But that he was himself ready to pass over, and was hindered
only by his sudden death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645, is merely an illusion of
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
Romish imagination.<note place='foot'>Butler, <q>Life of Hugo Grotius.</q> London, 1826. Motley, <q>John
of Barneveld,</q> vol. ii. New York, 1874.</note>&mdash;(2) King Wladislaus IV. of Poland thought
a union of Protestants and Catholics in his dominions not impossible,
and with this end in view arranged the <emph>Religious Conference of Thorn</emph>
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645. Prussia and Brandenburg were also invited to take
part in it. The elector sent his court preacher, John Berg, and
asked from the Duke of Brunswick the assistance of the Helmstadt
theologian, George Calixt. The chief representatives of the Lutheran
side were Abraham Calov, of Danzig, and John Hülsemann, of Wittenberg.
That Calixt, a Lutheran, took the part of the Reformed,
intensified the bitterness of the Lutherans at the outset. The result
was to increase the split on all sides. The Reformed set forth their
opinions in the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Declaratio Thorunensis</foreign>,</q> which in Brandenburg obtained
symbolical rank.&mdash;(3) <emph>J. B. Bossuet</emph>, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1704, Bishop
of Meaux, used all his eloquence to prepare a way for the return of
Protestants to the church in which alone is salvation. In several
treatises he gave an idealized exposition of the Catholic doctrine,
glossed over what was most offensive to Protestants, and sought by
subtlety and sophistry to represent the Protestant system as contradictory
and untenable.<note place='foot'><q>An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in Matters
of Controversy.</q> London, 1685. <q>Variations of Protestantism.</q> 2
vols. Dublin, 1836. Butler, <q>Some Account of the Life and Writings
of Bishop Bossuet.</q> London, 1812.</note> During the same period the Spaniard <emph>Spinola</emph>,
Bishop of Neustadt, who had come into the country as father confessor
of the empress, proposed a scheme of union at the imperial court.
The controverted points were to be decided at a free council, but the
primacy of the pope and the hierarchical system, as founded <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jure
humano</foreign>, were to be retained. In prosecuting his scheme, with the
secret support of Leopold I., Spinola, between <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1676 and 1691,
travelled through all Protestant Germany. He found most success,
out of respect for the emperor, in Hanover, where the Abbot of Loccum,
Molanus, zealously advocated the proposed union, in which on the
Catholic side Bossuet, on the Protestant side the great philosopher
<emph>Leibnitz</emph>, took part. But the negotiations ended in no practical result.
That Leibnitz had himself been already secretly inclined to Catholicism,
some think to have proved by a manuscript, found after his death,
entitled in another's hand, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Systema Theologicum Leibnitii</foreign>.</q> Favourably
disposed as Leibnitz was to investigate and recognise what was
profound and true even in Catholicism, so that he reached the conviction
that neither of the two churches had given perfect and adequate expression
to Christian truth, he has apparently sought in this work to make
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
clear to himself what and how much of specifically Catholic doctrines
were justifiable, and to sketch out a system of doctrine occupying a
place superior to both confessions. In this treatise many doctrines are
expressed in a manner quite divergent from that of the Tridentine
creed, while several expressions show how clearly he perceived the
contradiction between his own Protestant faith and the Romish
system, amid all his attempts to effect a reconciliation.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_153_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>The Lehnin Prophecy.</emph>&mdash;The hope entertained, about the end of the
seventeenth century, by Catholics throughout Germany of the speedy
restoration of the mother church was expressed in the so called
<emph>Vaticinium Lehninense</emph>. Professedly composed in the thirteenth century
by a monk called Hermann, of the cloister of Lehnin in Brandenburg,
it characterized with historical accuracy in 100 Leonine verses
the Brandenburg princes down to Frederick III., of whose coronation
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1701 it is ignorant, and after this proceeds in a purely fanciful
and arbitrary manner. From Joachim II., who openly joined the Reformation,
it enumerates eleven members, so that the history is just
brought down to Frederick William III. With the eleventh the
Hohenzollern dynasty ends, Germany is united, the Catholic church
restored, and Lehnin raised again to its ancient glory. Under Frederick
William IV., the Catholics diligently sought to prove the genuineness
of the prophecy, and by arbitrary methods to extend it so as to include
this prince. Lately <q>the deadly sin of Israel</q> spoken of in it has been
pointed to as a prophecy of the <hi lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</hi> of our own day (<ref target='Section_197'>§ 197</ref>).
The first certain trace of the poem is in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1693. Hilgenfeld thinks
that its author was a fanatical pervert, Andr. Fromm, who was previously
a Protestant pastor in Berlin, and died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1685 as canon of
Leitmeritz, in Bohemia.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 154. Lutheranism and Calvinism.</head>

<p>
The Reformed church made its way into the heart of
Lutheran Germany (§ 144) by the Calvinizing of Hesse-Cassel
and Lippe, and by the adherence of the electoral
house of Brandenburg. Renewed attempts to unite the two
churches were equally fruitless with the endeavours after a
Catholic-Protestant union.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_154_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Calvinizing of Hesse-Cassel, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1605-1646.</emph>&mdash;Philip the Magnanimous,
died 1567, left to his eldest son, William IV., one half of his
territories, comprising Lower Hesse and Schmalcald, with residence at
Cassel; to Louis IV. a fourth part, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> Upper Hesse, with residence
at Marburg; while his two youngest sons, Philip and George, were
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
made counts, with their residence at Darmstadt. Philip died in 1583
and Louis in 1604, both childless; in consequence of which the greater
part of Philip's territory and the northern half of Upper Hesse with
Marburg fell to Hesse-Cassel, and the southern half with Giessen to
Hesse-Darmstadt.&mdash;Landgrave <emph>William IV.</emph> of Hesse-Cassel sympathised
with his father's union and levelling tendencies, and by means
of general synods wrought eagerly to secure acceptance for them
throughout Hesse by setting aside the <emph>ubiquitous</emph> Christology (§ 142, 9)
and the Formula of Concord, while firmly maintaining the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Corpus
Doctrinæ Philippicum</foreign> (§ 142, 10). The fourth and last of those general
synods was held in 1582. Further procedure was meanwhile rendered
impossible by the increase of opposition. For, on the one hand, Louis
IV., under the influence of the acute and learned but contentious
Ægidius Hunnius, professor of theology at Marburg, 1576-1592, became
more and more decidedly a representative of exclusive Lutheranism;
and, on the other hand, William's Calvinizing schemes became
from day to day more reckless. His son and successor <emph>Maurice</emph> went
forward more energetically along the same lines as his father, especially
after the death of his uncle Louis in 1604, who bequeathed
to him the Marburg part of his territories. These had been given
him on condition that he should hold by the confession and its
apology as guaranteed by Charles V. in 1530. But in 1605 he forbad
the Marburg theologians to set forth the ubiquity theology; and when
they protested, issued a formal prohibition of the dogma with its
presuppositions and consequences, and insisted on the introduction of
the Reformed numbering of the commandments of the decalogue, and
the breaking of bread at the communion, and the removal of the
remaining images from the churches (§ 144, 2). The theologians again
protested, and were deprived of their offices. The result was the outbreak
of a popular tumult at Marburg, which Maurice suppressed by
calling in the military. When in several places in Upper and even in
Lower Hesse opposition was persisted in, and the resisting clergy could
not be won over either by persuasion and threatening or by persecution,
Maurice in 1607 convened consultative diocesan synods at Cassel,
Eschwege, Marburg, St. Goar, and soon after a general synod at Cassel,
which, giving expression on all points to the will of the landgrave,
drew up, besides a new hymnbook and catechism, a new <q>Christian
and correct confession of faith,</q> by which they openly and decidedly
declared their attachment to the Reformed church. Soon Hesse accepted
these conclusions, but not the rest of the state, where the
opposition of the nobles, clergy, and people, in spite of all attempts to
enforce this acceptance by military power, imprisonment, and deposition,
could not be altogether overcome.&mdash;Meanwhile George's son and
successor, <emph>Louis V.</emph>, 1596-1626, had been eagerly seeking to make capital
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
of those troubles in his cousin's domains in favour of the Darmstadt
dynasty. He gave his protection to the professors expelled from Marburg
in 1605, founded in 1607 a Lutheran university at Giessen, and
made accusations against his cousin before the imperial supreme
court, which in 1623, on the basis of the will of Louis IV. and the
Religious Peace of Augsburg (§ 137, 5), declared the inheritance forfeited,
and entrusted the electors of Cologne and Saxony with the
execution of the sentence. These in conjunction with the troops of
the league under Tilly attacked Upper and Lower Hesse; the Lutheran
University of Giessen was transferred to Marburg, and Upper Hesse,
after the banishment of the Reformed pastors, went over wholly to the
Lutheran confession. Maurice, completely broken down, resigned in
favour of his son <emph>William V.</emph>, who was obliged to make an agreement,
according to which he made over Upper Hesse, Schmalcald, and
Katzenelnbogen to <emph>George II.</emph> of Hesse-Darmstadt, the successor of
Louis V. In consequence of his attachment to Gustavus Adolphus in
the Thirty Years' War the ban of the empire was pronounced upon
William. He died in 1637. His widow, <emph>Amalie Elizabeth</emph>, undertook
the government on behalf of her young son William VI., and in 1646,
after repeated victories over George's troops, made a new agreement
with him, by which the territories taken away in 1627 were restored
to Hesse-Cassel, under a guarantee, however, that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status quo</foreign> in
matters of religion should be preserved, and that they should continue
predominantly Lutheran. The university property was divided;
Giessen obtained a Lutheran, Marburg a Reformed institution, and
Lower Hesse received a moderately but yet essentially Reformed ecclesiastical
constitution.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_154_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Calvinizing of Lippe, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1602.</emph>&mdash;Count Simon VI. of Lippe, in
his eventful life, was brought into close relations with the Reformed
Netherlands and with Maurice of Hesse. His dominions were
thoroughly Lutheran, but from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1602 Calvinism was gradually
introduced under the patronage of the prince. The chief promoter of
this innovation was Dreckmeyer, chosen general superintendent in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1599. At a visitation of churches in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1602, the festivals of
Mary and the apostles, exorcism, the sign of the cross, the host,
burning candles, and Luther's catechism were rejected. Opposing
pastors were deposed, and Calvinists put in their place. The city
Lemgo stood out longest, and persevered in its adherence to the
Lutheran confession during an eleven years' struggle with its prince,
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1606 to 1617. After the death of Simon VI., his successor,
Simon VII., allowed the city the free exercise of its Lutheran religion.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_154_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Elector of Brandenburg becomes Calvinist, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1613.</emph>&mdash;John
Sigismund, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1608-1619, had promised his grandfather, John George, to
maintain his connexion with the Lutheran church. But his own inclination,
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
which was strengthened by his son's marriage with a princess
of the Palatinate, and his connexion with the Netherlands, made him
forget his promise. Also his court preacher, the crypto-Calvinist
Solomon Fink, contributed to the same result. On Christmas Day, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1613, he went over to the Reformed church. In order to share in the
Augsburg Peace, he still retained the Augsburg Confession, naturally
in the form known as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Variata</foreign>. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1624, he issued a Calvinist
confession of his own, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Sigismundi</foreign> or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Marchica</foreign>, which
sought to reconcile the universality of grace with the particularity of
election (<ref target='Section_168_Para_1'>§ 168, 1</ref>). His people, however, did not follow the prince, not
even his consort, Anne of Prussia. The court preacher, Gedicke, who
would not retract his invectives against the prince and the Reformed
confession, was obliged to flee from Berlin, as also another preacher,
Mart. Willich. But when altars, images, and baptismal fonts were
thrown out of the Berlin churches, a tumult arose, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1615, which
was not suppressed without bloodshed. In the following year the
elector forbade the teaching of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>communicatio idiomatum</foreign> and the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ubiquitas corporis</foreign> (§ 141, 9) at the University of Frankfort-on-the-Oder.
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1614, owing to the publication of a keen controversial
treatise of Hutter (§ 158, 5) he forbade any of his subjects going to
the University of Wittenberg, and soon afterwards struck out the
Formula of Concord from the collection of the symbolical books of the
Lutheran church of his realm.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>§ 169, 1</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_154_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Union Attempts.</emph>&mdash;Hoë von Hoënegg, of an old Austrian family,
was from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1612 chief court preacher at Dresden, and as spiritual
adviser of the elector, John George, on the outbreak of the Thirty
Years' War, got Lutheran Saxony to take the side of the Catholic
emperor against the Calvinist Frederick V. of the Palatinate, elected
king of Bohemia. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1621, he had proved that <q>on ninety-nine
points the Calvinists were in accord with the Arians and the Turks.</q>
At the Religious Conference of Leipzig of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1631 a compromise was
accepted on both sides; but no practical result was secured. The
Religious Conference of Cassel, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1661, was a well meant endeavour
by some Marburg Reformed theologians and Lutherans of the school
of Calixt (<ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>§ 158, 2</ref>); but owing to the agitation caused by the Synergist
controversy, no important advance toward union could be accomplished.
The union efforts of Duke William of Brandenburg, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1640-1688,
were opposed by Paul Gerhardt, preacher in the church of St.
Nicholas in Berlin. On refusing to abstain from attacks on the
Reformed doctrine he was deposed from his office. He was soon appointed
pastor at Lübben in Lusatia, where he died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1676.&mdash;The
most zealous apostle of universal Protestant union, embracing even
the Anglican church, was the Scottish Presbyterian John Durie. From
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1628 when he officiated as pastor of an English colony at Elbing,
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
till his death at Cassel in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1640, he devoted his energies unweariedly
to this one task. He repeatedly travelled through Germany,
Sweden, Denmark, England, and the Netherlands, formed acquaintance
with clerical and civil authorities, had intercourse with them
by word and letter, published a multitude of tracts on this subject;
but at last could only look back with bitter complaints over the lost
labours of a lifetime.<note place='foot'><q>The Work of John Durie in behalf of Christian Union in the
Seventeenth Century,</q> by Dr. Briggs in <hi rend='italic'>Presbyterian Review</hi>, vol.
viii., 1887, pp. 297-300. To which is attached an account by Durie
himself, never before published, of his own union efforts from July,
1631, till September, 1633. See pp. 301-309.</note>&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>§ 169, 1</ref>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_155'/>
<head>§ 155. Anglicanism and Puritanism.<note place='foot'>Clarendon, <q>History of the Rebellion in England, 1649-1666.</q> 3
vols. Oxford, 1667. Burnet, <q>History of his Own Time, 1660-1713.</q>
2 vols. London, 1724. Guizot, <q>History of English Revolution of
1640.</q> London, 1856. Gardiner, <q>History of England, 1603-1642.</q>
10 vols. London, 1885. Marsden, <q>History of Early and Later Puritans,
down to the Ejection of the Nonconformists in 1662.</q> 2 vols.
London, 1853. Masson, <q>Life of Milton.</q> 4 vols. London, 1859 ff.</note></head>

<p>
On the outbreak of the English Revolution, occasioned by
the despotism of the first two Stuarts, crowds of Puritan exiles
returned from Holland and North America to their old home.
They powerfully strengthened their secret sympathisers in
their successful struggle against the episcopacy of the State
church (§ 131, 6); but, breaking up into rival parties, as
Presbyterians and Independents (§ 143, 3, 4), gave way to
fanatical extravagances. The victorious party of Independents
also split into two divisions: the one, after the old
Dutch style, simple and strict believers in Scripture; the
other, first in Cromwell's army, fanatical enthusiasts and
visionary saints (<ref target='Section_161_Para_1'>§ 161, 1</ref>). The Restoration, under the last
two Stuarts, sought to re-introduce Catholicism. It was
William of Orange, by his Act of Toleration of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1689,
who first brought to a close the Reformation struggles
within the Anglican church. It guaranteed, indeed, all the
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
pre-eminent privileges of an establishment to the Anglican
and Episcopal church, but also granted toleration to dissenters,
while refusing it to Catholics.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_155_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The First Two Stuarts.</emph>&mdash;<emph>James I.</emph>, dominated by the idea of the
royal supremacy, and so estranged from the Presbyterianism in which
he was brought up (§ 139, 11), as king of England, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1603-1625,
attached himself to the national Episcopal church, persecuted the
English Puritans, so that many of them again fled to Holland
(§ 143, 4), and forced Episcopacy upon the Scotch. <emph>Charles I.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1625-1649, went beyond his father in theory and practice, and thus
incurred the hatred of his Protestant subjects. William Laud, from
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1633 Archbishop of Canterbury, was the recklessly zealous promoter
of his despotic ideas, representing the Episcopacy, by reason of
its Divine institution and apostolic succession, as the foundation of
the church and the pillar of an absolute monarchy. Laud used his
position as primate to secure the introduction of his own theory into
the public church services, among other things making the communion
office an imitation as near as possible of the Romish mass. But when
he attempted to force upon the Scotch such <q>Baal-worship</q> by the
command of the king, they formed a league in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1638 for the defence
of Presbyterianism, the so called Great Covenant, and emphasised
their demand by sending an army into England. The king, who had
ruled for eleven years without a Parliament, was obliged now to call
together the representatives of the people. Scarcely had the Long
Parliament, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1640-1653, in which the Puritan element was supreme,
pacified the Scotch, than oil was anew poured on the flames by the
Irish massacre of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1641 (<ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>§ 153, 6</ref>). The Lower House, in spite of
the persistent opposition of the court, resolved on excluding the bishops
from the Upper House and formally abolishing Episcopacy; and in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1643, summoned the Westminster Assembly to remodel the organization
of the English church, at which Scotch representatives were
to have a seat. After long and violent debates with an Independent
minority, till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1648, the Assembly drew up a Presbyterian constitution
with a Puritan service, and in the Westminster Confession
a strictly Calvinistic creed. But only in Scotland were these decisions
heartily accepted. In England, notwithstanding their confirmation
by the Parliament, they received only partial and occasional acceptance,
owing to the prevalence of Independent opinions among the
people.&mdash;Since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1642, the tension between court and Parliament
had brought about the Civil War between Cavaliers and Roundheads.
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645, the royal troops were cut to pieces at Naseby by the
parliamentary army under Fairfax and Cromwell. The king fled to
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
the Scotch, by whom he was surrendered to the English Parliament
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1647. But when now the fanatical Independents, who formed
a majority in the army, began to terrorise the Parliament, it opened
negotiations for peace with the king. He was now ready to make
almost any sacrifice, only on religious and conscientious grounds he
could not agree to the unconditional abandonment of Episcopacy.
Even the Scotch, whose Presbyterianism was now threatened by the
Independents, as before it had been by the Episcopalians, longed for
the restoration of royalty, and to aid in this sent an army into
England in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1648. But they were defeated by Cromwell, who then
dismissed the Parliament and had all its Presbyterian members either
imprisoned or driven into retirement. The Independent remnant,
known as the Rump Parliament, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1648-1653, tried the king for
high treason and sentenced him to death. On January 30th, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1649,
he mounted the scaffold, on which Archbishop Laud had preceded him
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645, and fell under the executioner's axe.<note place='foot'>Mitchell, <q>The Westminster Assembly.</q> London, 1882. Mitchell
and Struthers, <q>Minutes of Westminster Assembly.</q> Edinburgh,
1874. Macpherson, <q>Handbook to Westminster Confession.</q> 2nd ed.
Edinburgh, 1882. Hetherington, <q>History of Westminster Assembly.</q>
4th ed. Edinburgh, 1878.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_155_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Commonwealth and the Protector.</emph>&mdash;Ireland had never yet
atoned for its crime of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1641 (<ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>§ 153, 6</ref>), and as it refused to
acknowledge the Commonwealth, Cromwell took terrible revenge in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1649. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1650 at Dunbar, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1651 at Worcester, he
completely destroyed the army of the Scots, who had crowned Charles
II., son of the executed king, drove out, in April <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1653, the Rump of
the Long Parliament, which had come to regard itself as a permanent
institution, and in July opened, with a powerful speech, two hours in
length, on God's ways and judgments, the Short or Barebones' Parliament,
composed of <q>pious and God-fearing men</q> selected by himself.
In this new Parliament which, with prayer and psalm-singing,
wrought hard at the re-organization of the executive, the bench, and
the church, the two parties of Independents were represented, the
fanatical enthusiasts indeed predominating, and so victorious in all
matters of debate. To this party Cromwell himself belonged. His
attachment to it, however, was considerably cooled in consequence of
the excesses of the Levellers (<ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>§ 161, 2</ref>), and the fantastic policy of the
parliamentarian Saints disgusted him more and more. When therefore,
on December 12th, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1653, after five months' fruitless opposition
to the radical demands of the extravagant majority, all the most
moderate members of the Parliament had resigned their seats and
returned their mandates into Cromwell's hands, he burst in upon
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
the psalm-singing remnant with his soldiers, and entered upon his
life-long office of the Protector of the Commonwealth with a new constitution.
He proclaimed toleration of all religious sects, Catholics
only being excepted on political grounds (<ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>§ 153, 6</ref>), giving equal rights
to Presbyterians, and offering no hindrance to the revival of Episcopacy.
He yet remained firmly attached to his early convictions. He believed
in a kingdom of the saints embracing the whole earth, and looked on
England as destined for the protection and spread of Protestantism.
Zürich greeted him as the great Protestant champion, and he showed
himself in this <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> in the valleys of Piedmont (<ref target='Section_153_Para_5'>§ 153, 5</ref>), in France, in
Poland, and in Silesia. He joined with all Protestant governments into
a league, offensive and defensive, against fanatical attempts of Papists
to recover their lost ground. When Spain and France sued for his
alliance, he made it a condition with the former that, besides allowing
free trade with the West Indies, it should abolish the Inquisition;
and of France he required an assurance that the rights of Huguenots
should be respected. And when in Germany a new election of
emperor was to take place, he urged the great electors that they
should by no means allow the imperial throne to continue with the
Catholic house of Austria. Meanwhile his path at home was a thorny
one. He was obliged to suppress fifteen open rebellions during five
years of his reign, countless secret plots threatened his life every day,
and his bitterest foes were his former comrades in the camp of the
the saints. After refusing the crown offered him in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1657, without
being able thereby to quell the discontents of parties, he died on
September 3rd, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1658, the anniversary of his glorious victories of
Dunbar and Worcester.<note place='foot'>Carlyle, <q>Cromwell's Letters and Speeches.</q> 2 vols. London, 1845.
Guizot, <q>Life of Cromwell.</q> London, 1877. Paxton Hood, <q>Oliver
Cromwell.</q> London, 1882. Picton, <q>Oliver Cromwell.</q> London, 1878.
Harrison, <q>Oliver Cromwell.</q> London, 1888. Barclay, <q>The Inner
Life of the Religious Societies of the Commonwealth.</q> London, 1877.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_155_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Restoration and the Act of Toleration.</emph>&mdash;The Restoration of
royalty under <emph>Charles II.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1660-1685, began with the reinstating
of the Episcopal church in all the privileges granted to it under
Elizabeth. The Corporation Act of December, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1661, was the first
of a series of enactments for this purpose. It required of all magistrates
and civil officers that they should take an oath acknowledging
the royal supremacy and communicate in the Episcopal church. The
Act of Uniformity of May, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1662, was still more oppressive. It
prohibited any clergyman entering the English pulpit or discharging
any ministerial function, unless he had been ordained by a bishop,
had signed the Thirty-nine Articles, and undertook to conduct worship
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
exactly in accordance with the newly revised Book of Common Prayer.
More than 2,000 Puritan ministers, who could not conscientiously submit
to those terms, were driven out of their churches. Then in June,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1664, the Conventicle Act was renewed, enforcing attendance at the
Episcopal church, and threatening with imprisonment or exile all
found in any private religious meeting of more than five persons.
In the following year the Five Mile Act inflicted heavy fines on all
nonconformist ministers who should approach within five miles of
their former congregation or indeed of any city. All these laws,
although primarily directed against all Protestant dissenters, told
equally against the Catholics, whom the king's Catholic sympathies
would willingly have spared. When now his league with Catholic
France against the Protestant Netherlands made it necessary for him
to appease his Protestant subjects, he hoped to accomplish this and
save the Catholics by his <q>Declaration of Indulgence</q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1672,
issued with the consent of Parliament, which suspended all penal
laws hitherto in force against dissenters. But the Protestant nonconformists
saw through this scheme, and the Parliament of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1673
passed the anti-Catholic Test Act (<ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>§ 153, 6</ref>). Equally vain were all
later attempts to secure greater liberties and privileges to the Catholics.
They only served to develop the powers of Parliament and to
bring the Episcopalians and nonconformists more closely together.
After spending his whole life oscillating between frivolous unbelief and
Catholic superstition, Charles II., on his death-bed, formally went over
to the Romish church, and had the communion and extreme unction
administered by a Catholic priest. His brother and successor <emph>James II.</emph>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1685-1688, who was from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1672 an avowed Catholic, sent a declaration
of obedience to Rome, received a papal nuncio in London, and
in the exercise of despotic power issued, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1687, a <q>Declaration
of Freedom of Conscience,</q> which, under the fair colour of universal
toleration and by the setting aside of the test oath, enabled him to
fill all civil and military offices with Catholics. This act proved
equally oppressive to the Episcopalians and to Protestant dissenters.
This intrigue cost him his throne. He had, as he himself said, staked
three kingdoms on a mass, and lost all the three. <emph>William III.</emph> of Orange,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1689-1702, grandson of Charles I. and son-in-law of James II.,
gave a final decision to the rights of the national Episcopal church
and the position of dissenters in the <emph>Act of Toleration</emph> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1689,
which he passed with consent of the Parliament. All penal laws
against the latter were abrogated, and religious liberty was extended
to all with the exception of Catholics and Socinians. The retention
of the Corporation and Test Acts, however, still excluded them from
the exercise of all political rights. They were also still obliged
to pay tithes and other church dues to the Episcopal clergy of their
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
dioceses, and their marriages and baptisms had to be administered in
the parish churches. Their ministers were also obliged to subscribe
the Thirty-nine Articles, with reservation of those points opposed to
their principles. The Act of Union of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1707, passed under Queen
Anne, a daughter of James II., which united England and Scotland
into the one kingdom of Great Britain, gave legitimate sanction to a
separate ecclesiastical establishment for each country. In Scotland the
Presbyterian churches continued the established church, while the
Episcopal was tolerated as a dissenting body. Congregationalism, however,
has been practically limited to England and North America,<note place='foot'>Guizot, <q>Richard Cromwell and the Restoration of Charles II.</q>
2 vols. London, 1856. Macpherson, <q>History of Great Britain from
the Restoration.</q> London, 1875.</note>&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_202_Para_5'>§ 202, 5</ref>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Roman Catholic Church.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_156'/>
<head>§ 156. The Papacy, Monkery, and Foreign Missions.</head>

<p>
Notwithstanding the regeneration of papal Catholicism
since the middle of the sixteenth century, Hildebrand's politico-theocratic
ideal was not realized. Even Catholic princes
would not be dictated to on political matters by the vicar of
Christ. The most powerful of them, France, Austria, and
Spain, during the sixteenth century, and subsequently also
Portugal, had succeeded in the claim to the right of excluding
objectionable candidates in papal elections. Ban and interdict
had lost their power. The popes, however, still clung
to the idea after they had been obliged to surrender the
reality, and issued from time to time powerless protestations
against disagreeable facts of history. Several new
monkish orders were instituted during this century, mostly
for teaching the young and tending the sick, but some also
expressly for the promoting of theological science. Of all
the orders, new and old, the Jesuits were by far the most
powerful. They were regarded with jealousy and suspicion
by the other orders. In respect of doctrine the Dominicans
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
were as far removed from them as possible within the limits
of the Tridentine Creed. But notwithstanding any such
mutual jealousies, they were all animated by one yearning
desire to oppose, restrict, and, where that was possible, to
uproot Protestantism. With similar zeal they devoted themselves
with wonderful success to the work of foreign missions.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Papacy.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Paul V.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1605-1621, equally energetic in his
civil and in his ecclesiastical policy, in a struggle with Venice, was
obliged to behold the powerlessness of the papal interdict. His successor,
<emph>Gregory XV.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1621-1623, founded the Propaganda, prescribed
a secret scrutiny in papal elections, and canonized Loyola, Xavier, and
Neri. He enriched the Vatican Library by the addition of the valuable
treasures of the Heidelberg Library, which Maximilian I. of
Bavaria sent him on his conquest of the Palatinate. <emph>Urban VIII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1623-1644, increased the Propaganda, improved the Roman <q>Breviary</q>
(§ 56, 2), condemned Jansen's <hi rend='italic'>Augustinus</hi> (<ref target='Section_156_Para_5'>§ 156, 5</ref>), and compelled
Galileo to recant. But on the other hand, through his onesided
ecclesiastical policy he was led into sacrificing the interests of the
imperial house of Austria. Not only did he fail to give support to
the emperor, but quite openly hailed Gustavus Adolphus, the saviour
of German Protestantism, as the God-sent saviour from the Spanish-Austrian
tyranny. For this he was pronounced a heretic at the
imperial court, and threatened with a second edition of the sack of
Rome (§ 132, 2). At the same time his soul was so filled with fanatical
hatred against Protestantism, that in a letter of 1631 he congratulated
the Emperor Ferdinand II. on the destruction of Magdeburg as
an act most pleasing to heaven and reflecting the highest credit upon
Germany, and expressed the hope that the glory of so great a victory
should not be restricted to the ruins of a single city. On receiving
the news of the death of Gustavus Adolphus in 1632 he broke out into
loud jubilation, saying that now <q>the serpent was slain which with
its poison had sought to destroy the whole world.</q> His successor,
<emph>Innocent X.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1644-1655, though vigorously protesting against the
Peace of Westphalia (<ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>§ 153, 2</ref>), was, owing to his abject subserviency
to a woman, his own sister-in-law, reproached with the title of a new
<hi rend='italic'>Johanna Papissa</hi>. <emph>Alexander VII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1655-1667, had the expensive
guardianship of his godchild Christina of Sweden (<ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>§ 153, 1</ref>), and fanned
into a flame the spark kindled by his predecessor in the Jansenist controversy
(<ref target='Section_156_Para_5'>§ 156, 5</ref>), so that his successor, <emph>Clement IX.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1667-1670,
could only gradually extinguish it. <emph>Clement X.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1670-1676, by
his preference for Spain roused the French king Louis XIV., who
avenged himself by various encroachments on the ecclesiastical administration
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
in his dominions. <emph>Innocent XI.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1676-1689, was a
powerful pope, zealously promoting the weal of the church and the
Papal States by introducing discipline among the clergy and attacking
the immorality that prevailed among all classes of society. He
unhesitatingly condemned sixty-five propositions from the lax Jesuit
code of morals. Against the arrogant ambassador of Louis XIV., he
energetically maintained his sovereign rights in his own domains,
while he unreservedly refused the claims of the French clergy, urged
by the king on the ground of the exceptional constitution of the
Gallican church. <emph>Alexander VIII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1689-1691, continued the fight
against Gallicanism, and condemned the Jesuit distinction between
theological and philosophical sin (§ 149, 10). <emph>Innocent XII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1691-1700,
could boast of having secured the complete subjugation of the
Gallican clergy after a hard struggle. He too wrought earnestly for
the reform of abuses in the curia. Specially creditable to him is the
stringent bull <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Romanum decet pontificem</foreign></q> against nepotism, which
extirpated the evil disease, so that it was never again openly practised
as an acknowledged right.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_165_Para_1'>§ 165, 1</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Jesuits and the Republic of Venice.</emph>&mdash;Venice was one of the
first of the Italian cities to receive the Jesuits with open arms,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1530. But the influence obtained by them over public affairs
through school and confessional, and their vast wealth accumulated
from bequests and donations, led the government, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1605, to forbid
their receiving legacies or erecting new cloisters. In vain did Paul
V. remonstrate. He then put Venice under an interdict. The Jesuits
sought to excite the people against the government, and for this were
banished in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1606. The pious and learned historian of the Council
of Trent and adviser of the State, Paul Sarpi, proved a vigorous supporter
of civil rights against the assumptions of the curia and the
Jesuits. When in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1607 he refused a citation of Inquisition, he
was dangerously wounded by three dagger stabs, inflicted by hired
bandits, in whose stilettos he recognised the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>stilum curiæ</foreign>. He died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1623. After a ten months' vain endeavour to enforce the interdict,
the pope at last, through French mediation, concluded a peace
with the republic, without, however, being able to obtain either the
abolition of the objectionable ecclesiastico-political laws or permission
for the return of the Jesuits. Only after the republic had been weakened
through the unfortunate Turkish war of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645 was it found
willing to submit. Even in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1653 it refused the offer of 150,000
ducats from the Jesuit general for the Turkish campaign; but when
Alexander VII. suppressed several rich cloisters, their revenues were
thankfully accepted for this purpose. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1657, on the pope's
promise of further pecuniary aid, the decree of banishment was withdrawn.
The Jesuit fathers now returned in crowds, and soon regained
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
much of their former influence and wealth. No pope has ever since
issued an interdict against any country.<note place='foot'>Bargraves, <q>Alexander VII. and His Cardinals.</q> Ed. by Robertson.
London, 1866.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Gallican Liberties.</emph>&mdash;Although <emph>Louis XIV.</emph> of France, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1643-1715,
as a good Catholic king, powerfully supported the claims
of papal dogmatics against the Jansenists (§§ <ref target='Section_156_Para_5'>156, 5</ref>; 164, 7), he was
by no means unfaithful to the traditional ecclesiastical polity of
his house (§§ 96, 21; 110, 1, 9, 13, 14), and was often irritated to the
utmost pitch by the pope's opposition to his political interests. He
rigorously insisted upon the old customary right of the Crown to the
income of certain vacant ecclesiastical offices, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jus regaliæ</foreign>, and
extended it to all bishoprics, burdened church revenues with military
pensions, confiscated ecclesiastical property, etc. Innocent XI. energetically
protested against such exactions. The king then had an
assembly of the French called together in Paris on March 19th, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1682, which issued the famous <hi rend='italic'>Four Propositions of the Gallican Clergy</hi>,
drawn up by Bishop Bossuet of Meaux. These set forth the fundamental
rights of the French church: (1) In secular affairs the pope
has no jurisdiction over princes and kings, and cannot release their
subjects from their allegiance; (2) The spiritual power of the pope is
subject to the higher authority of the general councils; (3) For France
it is further limited by the old French ecclesiastical laws; and, (4) Even
in matters of faith the judgment of the pope without the approval of
a general assembly of the church is not unalterable. Innocent consequently
refused to institute any of the newly appointed bishops. He
was not even appeased by the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1685. He was pleased indeed, and praised the deed, and celebrated
it by a <hi rend='italic'>Te Deum</hi>, but objected to the violent measures for the conversion
of Protestants as contrary to the teaching of Christ. Then also
there arose a keen struggle against the mischievous extension of the
right of asylum on the part of foreign embassies at Rome. On the
pope's representation all the powers but France agreed to a restriction
of the custom. The pope tolerated the nuisance till the death of the
French ambassador in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1687, but then insisted on its abolition
under pain of the ban. In consequence of this Louis sent his new
ambassador into Rome with two companies of cavaliers, threw the
papal nuntio in France into prison, and laid siege to the papal state
of Avignon (§ 110, 4). But Innocent was not thus to be terrorized, and
the French ambassador was obliged, after eighteen months' vain demonstrations,
to quit Rome. Alexander VIII. repeated the condemnation
of the Four Propositions, and Innocent XIII. also stood firm. The
French episcopate, on the pope's persistent refusal to install bishops
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
nominated by the king, was at last constrained to submit. <q>Lying
at the feet of his holiness,</q> the bishops declared that everything concluded
in that assembly was null and void; and even Louis XIV.,
under the influence of Madame de Maintenon (<ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>§ 157, 3</ref>), wrote to the
pope in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1693, saying that he recalled the order that the Four
Propositions should be taught in all the schools. There still, however,
survived among the French clergy a firm conviction of the Gallican
Liberties, and the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>droit de régale</foreign> continued to have the force of law.<note place='foot'>Cunningham, <q>Discussions on Church Principles.</q> Edin., 1863.
Chap. v.: <q>The Liberties of the Gallican Church,</q> pp. 133-163.</note>&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_197_Para_1'>§ 197, 1</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Galileo and the Inquisition.</emph>&mdash;Galileo Galilei, professor of mathematics
at Pisa and Padua, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1642, among his many
distinguished services to the physical, mathematical, and astronomical
sciences, has the honour of being the pioneer champion of the Copernican
system. On this account he was charged by the monks with contradicting
Scripture. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1616 Paul V., through Cardinal Bellarmine,
threatened him with the Inquisition and prison unless he agreed to
cease from vindicating and lecturing upon his heretical doctrine. He
gave the required promise. But in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1632 he published a dialogue,
in which three friends discussed the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems,
without any formal conclusion, but giving overwhelming reasons in
favour of the latter. Urban VIII., in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1636, called upon the Inquisition
to institute a process against him. He was forced to recant,
was condemned to prison for an indefinite period, but was soon liberated
through powerful influence. How far the old man of seventy-two
years of age was compelled by torture to retract is still a matter of
controversy. It is, however, quite evident that it was forced from him
by threats. But that Galileo went out after his recantation, gnashing
his teeth and stamping his feet, muttering, <q>Nevertheless it moves!</q>
is a legend of a romancing age. This, however, is the fact, that the
Congregation of the Index declared the Copernican theory to be false,
irrational, and directly contrary to Scripture; and that even in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1660 Alexander VII., with apostolic authority, formally confirmed
this decree and pronounced it <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign> (§ 149, 4) irrevocable. It
was only in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1822 that the curia set it aside, and in a new edition
of the Index (§ 149, 14) in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835 omitted the works of Galileo as
well as those of Copernicus.<note place='foot'>Von Gebler, <q>Galileo Galilei and the Roman Curia,</q> transl. by
Sturge. London, 1879. Madden, <q>Galileo and the Inquisition.</q>
London, 1863. Brewster, <q>Martyrs of Science.</q> Edin., 1841. Von
Gebler denies that any condemnation <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign> was given.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Controversy on the Immaculate Conception</emph> (§ 112, 4) received
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
a new impulse from the nun <emph>Mary of Jesus, died 1665, of Agreda</emph>, in Old
Castile, superior of the cloister there of the Immaculate Conception,
writer of the <q>Mystical City of God.</q> This book professed to give an
inspired account of the life of the Virgin, full of the strangest absurdities
about the immaculate conception. The Sorbonne pronounced
it offensive and silly; the Inquisition in Spain, Portugal, and Rome
forbad the reading of it; but the Franciscans defended it as a divine
revelation. A violent controversy ensued, which Alexander VII.
silenced in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1661 by expressing approval of the doctrine of the
immaculate conception set forth in the book.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>§ 185, 2</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The Devotion of the Sacred Heart of Jesus.</emph>&mdash;The nun <emph>Margaret
Alacoque</emph>, in the Burgundian cloister of <hi rend='italic'>Paray le Monial</hi>, born <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1647,
recovering from a painful illness when but three years old, vowed to
the mother of God, who frequently appeared to her, perpetual chastity,
and in gratitude for her recovery adopted the name of Mary, and
when grown up resisted temptations by inflicting on herself the
severest discipline, such as long fasts, sharp flagellations, lying on
thorns, etc. Visions of the Virgin no longer satisfied her. She longed
to lavish her affections on the Redeemer himself, which she expressed
in the most extravagant terms. She took the Jesuit <emph>La Colombière</emph> as
her spiritual adviser in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1675. In a new vision she beheld the side
of her Beloved opened, and saw his heart glowing like a sun, into
which her own was absorbed. Down to her death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1690 she felt
the most violent burning pains in her side. In a second vision she
saw her Beloved's heart burning like a furnace, into which were taken
her own heart and that of her spiritual adviser. In a third vision he
enjoined the observance of a special <q>Devotion of the Sacred Heart</q>
by all Christendom on the Friday after the octave of the <hi rend='italic'>Corpus
Christi</hi> festival and on the first Friday of every month. La Colombière,
being made director, put forth every effort to get this celebration
introduced throughout the church, and on his death the idea was
taken up by the whole Jesuit order. Their efforts, however, for fully
a century proved unavailing. At this point, too, their most bitter
opponents were the Dominicans. But even without papal authority
the Jesuits so far succeeded in introducing the absurdities of this cult,
and giving expression to it in word and by images, that by the beginning
of the eighteenth century there were more than 300 male and
female societies engaged in this devotion, and at last, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1765,
<emph>Clement XIII.</emph>, the great friend of the Jesuits, gave formal sanction to
this special celebration.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_188_Para_12'>§ 188, 12</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>New Congregations and Orders.</emph>&mdash;(1) At the head of the new orders
of this century stands the <emph>Benedictine Congregation of St. Banne</emph> at
Verdun, founded by Didier de la Cour. Elected Abbot of St. Banne
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1596, he gave his whole strength to the reforming of this
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
cloister, which had fallen into luxurious and immoral habits. By a
papal bull of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1604 all cloisters combining with St. Banne into a
congregation were endowed with rich privileges. Gradually all the
Benedictine monasteries of Lorraine and Alsace joined the union.
Didier's reforms were mostly in the direction of moral discipline and
asceticism; but in the new congregation scholarship was represented
by Calmet, Ceillier, etc., and many gave themselves to work as
teachers in the schools.&mdash;(2) Much more important for the promotion
of theological science, especially for patristics and church history,
was another Benedictine congregation founded in France in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1618
by Laurence Bernard, that of <emph>St. Maur</emph>, named after a disciple of St.
Benedict. The members of this order devoted themselves exclusively
to science and literary pursuits. To them belonged the distinguished
names, Mabillon, Montfaucon, Reinart, Martène, D'Achery, Le Nourry,
Durand, Surius, etc. They showed unwearied diligence in research
and a noble liberality of judgment. The editions of the most celebrated
Fathers issued by them are the best of the kind, and this may
also be said of the great historical collections which we owe to their
diligence.&mdash;(3) <emph>The Fathers of the Oratory of Jesus</emph> are an imitation of
the Priests of the Oratory founded by Philip Neri (§ 149, 7). Peter
of Barylla, son of a member of parliament, founded it in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1611
by building an oratory at Paris. He was more of a mystic than of
a scholar, but his order sent out many distinguished and brilliant
theologians; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Malebranche, Morinus, Thomassinus, Rich, Simon,
Houbigant.&mdash;(4) <emph>The Piarists</emph>, <hi rend='italic'>Patres scholarum piarum</hi>, were founded
in Rome in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1607 by the Spaniard Joseph Calasanza. The order
adopted as a fourth vow the obligation of gratuitous tuition. They
were hated by the Obscurantist Jesuits for their successful labours
for the improvement of Catholic education, especially in Poland and
Austria, and also because they objected to all participation in political
schemes.&mdash;(5) <emph>The Order of the Visitation of Mary</emph>, or <hi rend='italic'>Salesian Nuns</hi>, instituted
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1610 by the mystic Francis de Sales and Francisca
Chantal (<ref target='Section_157_Para_1'>§ 157, 1</ref>). They visited the poor and sick in imitation of
Elizabeth's visit to the Virgin (Luke i. 39); but the papal rescript of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1618 gave prominence to the education of children.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_8'/>
8.&mdash;(6) <emph>The Priests of the Missions and Sisters of Charity</emph> were both
founded by Vincent de Paul. Born of poor parents, he was, after
completing his education, captured by pirates, and as a slave converted
his renegade master to Christianity. As domestic chaplain to
the noble family of Gondy he was characterized in a remarkable degree
for unassuming humility, and he wrought earnestly and successfully
as a home missionary. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1618 he founded the order of Sisters of
Mercy, who became devoted nurses of the sick throughout all France,
and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1627 that of the Priests of the Missions, or Lazarists, who
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
travelled the country attending to the spiritual and bodily wants of
men. After the death of the Countess Gondy in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1625, he placed
at the head of the Sisters of Mercy the widow Louise le Gras, distinguished
equally for qualities of head and heart. Vincent died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1660, and was subsequently canonized.<note place='foot'>Wilson, <q>Life of Vincent de Paul.</q> London, 1874.</note>&mdash;(7) <emph>The Trappists</emph>,
founded by De Rancé, a distinguished canon, who in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1664 passed
from the extreme of worldliness to the extreme of fanatical asceticism.
The order got its name from the Cistercian abbey La Trappe
in Normandy, of which Rancé was commendatory abbot. Amid
many difficulties he succeeded, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1665, in thoroughly reforming
the wild monks, who were called <q>the bandits of La Trappe.</q>
His rule enjoined on the monks perpetual silence, only broken in
public prayer and singing and in uttering the greeting as they met,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Memento mori</foreign>. Their bed was a hard board with some straw; their
only food was bread and water, roots, herbs, some fruit and vegetables,
without butter, fat, or oil. Study was forbidden, and they occupied
themselves with hard field labour. Their clothing was a dark-brown
cloak worn on the naked body, with wooden shoes. Very few cloisters
besides La Trappe submitted to such severities (<ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>§ 185, 2</ref>).&mdash;(8) <emph>The
English Nuns</emph>, founded at St. Omer, in France, by Mary Ward, the
daughter of an English Catholic nobleman, for the education of girls.
Originally composed of English maidens, it was afterwards enlarged
by receiving those of other nationalities, with establishments in
Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands. It did not obtain papal confirmation,
and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1630 Urban VIII., giving heed to the calumnies
of enemies, formally dissolved it on account of arrogance, insubordination,
and heresy. All its institutions and schools were then closed,
while Mary herself was imprisoned and given over to the Inquisition
in Rome. Urban was soon convinced of her innocence and set her free.
Her scattered nuns were now collected again, but succeeded only in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1703 in obtaining confirmation from Clement XI. Their chief tasks
were the education of youth and care of the sick. They were arranged
in three classes, according to their rank in life, and were bound by
their vows for a year or at the most three years, after which they
might return to the world and marry. Their chief centre was Bavaria
with the mother cloister in Munich.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>§ 165, 2</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>The Propaganda.</emph>&mdash;Gregory XV. gave unity and strength to the
efforts for conversion of heretics and heathens by instituting, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1662, the <hi rend='italic'>Congregatio de Propaganda Fide</hi>. Urban VIII. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1627
attached to it a missionary training school, recruited as far as possible
from natives of the respective countries, like Loyola's <hi rend='italic'>Collegium
Germanicum</hi> founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1552 (§ 151, 1). He was thus able every
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
Epiphany to astonish Romans and foreigners by what seemed a repetition
of the pentecostal miracle of tongues. At this institute training
in all languages was given, and breviaries, mass and devotional books,
and handbooks were printed for the use of the missions. It was also
the centre from which all missionary enterprises originated.&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_204_Para_2'>§ 204, 2</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_10'/>
10. <emph>Foreign Missions.</emph>&mdash;Even during this century the Jesuits excelled
all others in missionary zeal. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1608 they sent out from Madrid
mission colonies among the wandering Indians of South America, and
no Spaniard could settle there without their permission. The most
thoroughly organized of these was that of <emph>Paraguay</emph>, in which, according
to their own reports, over 100,000 converted savages lived happily
and contented under the mild, patriarchal rule of the Jesuits for
140 years, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1610-1750; but according to another well informed,
though perhaps not altogether impartial, account, that of Ibagnez, a
member of the mission, expelled for advising submission to the decree
depriving it of political independence, the paternal government was
flavoured by a liberal dose of slave-driver despotism. It was at least
an undoubted fact, notwithstanding the boasted patriarchal idyllic
character of the Jesuit state, that the order amassed great wealth from
the proceeds of the industry of their <foreign rend='italic'>protégés</foreign>.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_165_Para_3'>§ 165, 3</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_11'/>
11. <emph>In the East Indies</emph> (§ 150, 1) the Jesuits had uninterrupted
success. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1606, in order to make way among the Brahmans, the
Jesuit Rob. Nobili assumed their dress, avoided all contact with even
the converts of low caste, giving them the communion elements not
directly, but by an instrument, or laying them down for them outside
the door, and as a Christian Brahman made a considerable impression
upon the most exclusive classes.&mdash;In <emph>Japan</emph> the mission prospects were
dark (§ 150, 2). Mendicants and Jesuits opposed and mutually excommunicated
one another. The Catholic Spaniards and Portuguese
were at feud among themselves, and only agreed in intriguing against
Dutch and English Protestants. When the land was opened to foreign
trade, it became the gathering point of the moral scum of all European
countries, and the traffic in Japanese slaves, especially by the Portuguese,
brought discredit on the Christian cause. The idea gained ground that
the efforts at Christianization were but a prelude to conquest by the
Spaniards and Portuguese. In the new organization of the country by
the <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>shiogun</foreign> Ijejasu all governors were to vow hostility to Christians
and foreigners. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1606 he forbad the observance of the Christian
religion anywhere in the land. When the conspiracy of a Christian
daimio was discovered, he caused, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1614, whole shiploads of
Jesuits, mendicants, and native priests to be sent out of the country.
But as many of the banished returned, death was threatened against
all who might be found, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1624 all foreigners, with the exception
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
of Chinese and Dutch, were rigorously driven out. And now
a bloody persecution of native Christians began. Many thousands
fled to China and the neighbouring islands; crowds of those remaining
were buried alive or burnt on piles made up of the wood of Christian
crosses. The victims displayed a martyr spirit like those of the early
days. Those who escaped organized in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1637 an armed resistance,
and held the fortress of Arima in face of the <foreign lang='ja' rend='italic'>shiogun's</foreign> army sent
against them. After a three months' siege the fortress was conquered
by the help of Dutch cannon; 37,000 were massacred in the fort, and
the rest were hurled down from high rocks. The most severe enactments
were passed against Christians, and the edicts filled with fearful
curses against <q>the wicked sect</q> and <q>the vile God</q> of the Christians
were posted on all the bridges, street corners, and squares. Christianity
now seemed to be completely stamped out. The recollection of this
work, however, was still retained down to the nineteenth century. For
when French missionaries went in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860 to Nagasaki, they found to
their surprise in the villages around thousands (?) who greeted them
joyfully as the successors of the first Christian missionaries.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_12'/>
12. <emph>In China</emph>, after Ricci's death (§ 150, 1), the success of the
mission continued uninterrupted. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1628 a German Jesuit, Adam
Schell, went out from Cologne, who gained great fame at court for his
mathematical skill. Louis XIV. founded at Paris a missionary college,
which sent out Jesuits thoroughly trained in mathematics. But
Dominicans and Franciscans over and over again complained to Rome
of the Jesuits. They never allowed missionaries of other orders to
come near their own establishments, and actually drove them away
from places where they had begun to work. They even opposed priests,
bishops, and vicars-apostolic sent by the Propaganda, declared their
papal briefs forgeries, forbad their congregations to have any intercourse
with those <q>heretics,</q> and under suspicion of Jansenism brought
them before the Inquisition of Goa. Clement X. issued a firm-toned
bull against such proceedings; but the Jesuits gave no heed to it, and
attended only to their own general. The papal condemnation a century
later of the Jesuits' accommodation scheme, and their permission
of heathen rites and beliefs to the new converts, complained against
by the Dominicans, was equally fruitless. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645 Innocent X.
forbad this practice on pain of excommunication; but still they continued
it till the decree was modified by Alexander VII. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1656.
After persistent complaints by the Dominicans, Innocent XII. appointed
a new congregation in Rome to investigate the question, but
their deliberations yielded no result for ten years. At last Clement
XI. confirmed the first decree of Innocent X., condemned anew the so
called Chinese rites, and sent the legate Thomas of Tournon in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1703 to enforce his decision. Tournon, received at first by the emperor
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
at Pekin with great consideration, fell into disfavour through Jesuit
intrigues, was banished from the capital, and returned to Nankin.
But as he continued his efforts from this point, and an attempt to
poison him failed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1707, he went to Macao, where he was put in
prison by the Portuguese, in which he died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1710. Clement
XI., in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1715, issued his decree against the Chinese rites in a yet
severer form; but the Franciscan who proclaimed the papal bull
was put in prison as an offender against the laws of the country,
and, after being maltreated for seventeen months, was banished. So
proudly confident had the Jesuits become, that in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1720 they
treated with scorn and contempt the papal legate Mezzabarba, Patriarch
of Alexandria, who tried by certain concessions to move them to
submit. A more severe decree of Clement XII. of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1735 was scoffed
at by being proclaimed only in the Latin original. Benedict XIV.
succeeded for the first time, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1742, in breaking down their opposition,
after the charges had been renewed by the Capuchin Norbert.
All the Jesuit missionaries were now obliged by oath to exclude all
pagan customs and rites; but with this all the glory and wonderful
success of their Asiatic missions came to an end.&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_165_Para_3'>§ 165, 3</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_156_Para_13'/>
13. <emph>Trade and Industry of the Jesuits.</emph>&mdash;As Christian missions generally
deserve credit, not only for introducing civilization and culture
along with the preaching of the gospel into far distant heathen lands,
but also for having greatly promoted the knowledge of countries,
peoples, and languages among their fellow countrymen at home, opening
up new fields for colonization and trade, these ends were also
served by the world-wide missionary enterprises of the Jesuits,
and were in perfect accordance with the character and intention
of this order, which aimed at universal dominion. In carrying out
these schemes the Jesuits abandoned the ascetical principles of their
founder and their vow of poverty, amassing enormous wealth by
securing in many parts a practical monopoly of trade. Their fifth
general, Aquaviva (§ 149, 8), secured from Gregory XIII., avowedly
in favour of the mission, exclusive right to trade with both Indies.
They soon erected great factories in all parts of the world, and had
ships laden with valuable merchandise on all seas. They had mines,
farms, sugar plantations, apothecary shops, bakeries, etc., founded
banks, sold relics, miracle-working amulets, rosaries, healing Ignatius- and
Xavier-water (§ 149, 11), etc., and in successful legacy-hunting
excelled all other orders. Urban VIII. and Clement XI. issued severe
bulls against such abuses, but only succeeded in restricting them to
some extent.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>§ 165, 9</ref>.
</p>

<p>
14. <emph>An Apostate to Judaism.</emph>&mdash;Gabriel, or as he was called after circumcision,
<emph>Uriel Acosta</emph>, was sprung from a noble Portuguese family, originally
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
Jewish. Doubting Christianity in consequence of the traffic in
indulgences, he at last repudiated the New Testament in favour of the
Old. He refused rich ecclesiastical appointments, fled to Amsterdam,
and there formally went over to Judaism. Instead of the biblical
Mosaism, however, he was disappointed to find only Pharisaic pride
and Talmudic traditionalism, against which he wrote a treatise in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1623. The Jews now denounced him to the civil authorities as a
denier of God and immortality. The whole issue of his book was burnt.
Twice the synagogue thundered its ban against him. The first was
withdrawn on his recantation, and the second, seven years after, upon
his submitting to a severe flagellation. In spite of all he held to his
Sadducean standpoint to his end in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1647, when he died by his own
hand from a pistol shot, driven to despair by the unceasing persecution
of the Jews.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_157'/>
<head>§ 157. Quietism and Jansenism.</head>

<p>
Down to the last quarter of the seventeenth century the
Spanish Mystics (§ 149, 16), and especially those attached to
Francis de Sales, were recognised as thoroughly orthodox.
But now the Jesuits appeared as the determined opponents
of all mysticism that savoured of enthusiasm. By means of
vile intrigues they succeeded in getting Molinos, Guyon, and
Fénelon condemned, as <q>Quietist</q> heretics, although the
founder of their party had been canonized and his doctrine
solemnly sanctioned by the pope. Yet more objectionable
to the Jesuits was that reaction toward Augustinianism
which, hitherto limited to the Dominicans (§ 149, 13), and
treated by them as a theological theory, was now spreading
among other orders in the form of French Jansenism,
accompanied by deep moral earnestness and a revival of the
whole Christian life.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_157_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Francis de Sales and Madame Chantal.</emph>&mdash;Francis Count de Sales,
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1602 Bishop of Geneva, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, with Annecy as his
residence, had shown himself a good Catholic by his zeal in rooting
out Protestantism in Chablais, on the south of the Genevan lake. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1604 meeting the young widowed Baroness de Chantal, along with
whom at a later period he founded the Order of the Visitation of Mary
(<ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>§ 156, 7</ref>), he proved a good physician to her amid her sorrow, doubts,
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
and temptations. He sought to qualify himself for this task by reading
the writings of St. Theresa. Teacher and scholar so profited by
their mystical studies, that in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1665 Alexander VII. deemed the one
worthy of canonization and the other of beatification. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1877
Pius IX. raised Francis to the dignity of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>doctor ecclesiæ</foreign>. His <q>Introduction
to the Devout Life</q> affords a guide to laymen to the life of
the soul, amid all the disturbances of the world resting in calm contemplation
and unselfish love of God. In the Catholic Church, next
to À Kempis' <q>Imitation of Christ,</q> it is the most appreciated and
most widely used book of devotion. In his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Theotime</foreign></q> he leads the
reader deeper into the yearnings of the soul after fellowship with God,
and describes the perfect peace which the soul reaches in God.<note place='foot'>Marsolier, <q>Life of Francis de Sales,</q> translated by Coombes,
London, 1812.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_157_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Michael Molinos.</emph>&mdash;After Francis de Sales a great multitude of
male and female apostles of the new mystical gospel sprang up, and
were favourably received by all the more moderate church leaders.
The reactionaries, headed by the Jesuits, sought therefore all the more
eagerly to deal severely with the Spaniard Michael Molinos. Having
settled in Rome in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1669, he soon became the most popular of father
confessors. His <q>Spiritual Guide</q> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1675 received the approval
of the Holy Office, and was introduced into Protestant Germany through
a Latin translation by Francke in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1687, and a German translation in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1699 by Arnold. In it he taught those who came to the confessional
that the way to the perfection of the Christian life, which consists in
peaceful rest in the most intimate communion with God, is to be found
in spiritual conference, secret prayer, active and passive contemplation,
in rigorous destruction of all self-will, and in disinterested love
of God, fortified, wherever that is possible, by daily communion. The
success of the book was astonishing. It promptly influenced all ranks
and classes, both men and women, lay and clerical, not only in Italy,
but also by means of translations in France and Spain. But soon a
reaction set in. As early as <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1681 the famous Jesuit <emph>Segneri</emph> issued a
treatise, in which he charged Molinos' contemplative mysticism with
onesidedness and exaggeration. He was answered by the pious and
learned Oratorian <emph>Petrucci</emph>. A commission, appointed by the Inquisition
to examine the writings of both parties, pronounced the views of
Molinos and Petrucci to be in accordance with church doctrine and
Segneri's objections to be unfounded. All that Jesuitism reckoned
as foundation, means, and end of piety was characterized as purely
elementary. No hope could be entertained of winning over Innocent
XI., the bitter enemy of the Jesuits. But Louis XIV. of France,
at the instigation of his Jesuit father confessor, Lachaise, expressed
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
through his ambassador his surprise that his holiness should, not
only tolerate, but even encourage and support so dangerous a heretic,
who taught all Christendom to undervalue the public services of the
Church. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1685 Innocent referred the matter to the tribunal
of the Inquisition. Throughout the two years during which the
investigation proceeded all arts were used to secure condemnation.
Extreme statements of fanatical adherents of Molinos were not rarely
met with, depreciating the public ordinances and ceremonies, confession,
hearing of mass, church prayers, rosaries, etc. The pope, facile with
age, amid groans and lamentations, allowed things to take their course,
and at last confirmed the decree of the Inquisition of August 28th,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1687, by which Molinos was found guilty of spreading godless
doctrine, and sixty-eight propositions, partly from his own writings,
partly from the utterances of his adherents, were condemned as heretical
and blasphemous. The heretic was to abjure his heresies publicly, clad
in penitential garments, and was then consigned to lifelong solitary
confinement in a Dominican cloister, where he died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1697.<note place='foot'><q>Golden Thoughts from the <q>Spiritual Guide</q> of Molinos.</q> With
preface by J. H. Shorthouse. London, 1883.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_157_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Madame Guyon and Fénelon.</emph>&mdash;After her husband's death, <emph>Madame
Guyon</emph>, in company with her father confessor, the Barnabite <emph>Lacombe</emph>,
who had been initiated during a long residence at Rome into the
mysteries of Molinist mysticism, spent five years travelling through
France, Switzerland, Savoy, and Piedmont. Though already much suspected,
she won the hearts of many men and women among the clergy
and laity, and enkindled in them by personal conference, correspondence,
and her literary work, the ardour of mystical love. Her brilliant
writings are indeed disfigured by traces of foolish exaggeration, fanaticism
and spiritual pride. She calls herself the woman of Revelation
xii. 1, and the <foreign rend='italic'>mère de la grace</foreign> of her adherents. The following
are the main distinguishing characteristics of her mysticism: The
necessity of turning away from everything creaturely, rejecting all
earthly pleasure and destroying every selfish interest, as well as of
turning to God in passive contemplation, silent devotion, naked faith,
which dispensed with all intellectual evidence, and pure disinterested
love, which loves God for Himself alone, not for the eternal salvation
obtained through Him. On her return to Paris with Lacombe in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1686 the proper martyrdom of her life began. Her chief persecutor
was her step-brother, the Parisian superior of the Barnabites,
La Mothe, who spread the most scandalous reports about his half-sister
and Lacombe, and had them both imprisoned by a royal decree in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1688. Lacombe never regained his liberty. Taken from one
prison to another, he lost his reason, and died in an asylum in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
1699. Madame Guyon, however, by the influence of Madame de Maintenon,
was released after ten months' confinement. The favour of this
royal dame was not of long continuance. Warned on all sides of the
dangerous heretic, she broke off all intercourse with her in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1693,
and persuaded the king to appoint a new commission, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1694, with
Bishop <emph>Bossuet</emph> of Meaux at its head, to examine her suspected writings.
This commission meeting at Issy, had already, in February, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1695,
drawn up thirty test articles, when <emph>Fénelon</emph>, tutor of the king's grandson,
and now nominated to the archbishopric of Cambray, was ordered by
the king to take part in the proceedings. He signed the articles,
though he objected to much in them, and had four articles of his own
added. Madame Guyon also did so, and Bossuet at last testified for
her that he had found her moral character stainless and her doctrine
free from Molinist heresy. But the bigot Maintenon was not satisfied
with this. Bossuet demanded the surrender of this certificate that he
might draw up another; and when Madame Guyon refused, on the
basis of a statement by the crazed Lacombe, she was sent to the Bastile
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1696. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1697 Fénelon had written in her defence his
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Explication des Maximes des Saintes sur la Vie Intérieur</foreign>,</q> showing
that the condemned doctrines of passive contemplation, secret prayer,
naked faith, and disinterested love, had all been previously taught by
St. Theresa, John of the Cross, Francis de Sales, and other saints. He
sent this treatise for an opinion to Rome. A violent controversy then
arose between Bossuet and Fénelon. The pious, well-meaning pope,
<emph>Innocent XII.</emph>, endeavoured vainly to bring about a good understanding.
Bossuet and the all-powerful Maintenon wished no reconciliation, but
condemnation, and gave the king and pope no rest till very reluctantly
he prohibited the objectionable book by a brief in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1699, and
condemned twenty-three propositions from it as heretical. Fénelon,
strongly attached to the church, and a bitter persecutor of Protestants,
made an unconditional surrender, as guilty of a defective exposition
of the truth. But Madame Guyon continued in the Bastile till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1701, when she retired to Blois, where she died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1717. Bossuet
had died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1704, and Fénelon in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1715. She published only
two of her writings: <q>An Exposition of the Song,</q> and the <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Moyen
Court et très Facile de faire Oraison</foreign>.</q> Many others, including her translation
and expositions of the Bible, were during her lifetime edited in
twenty volumes by her friend, the Reformed preacher of the Palatinate,
Peter Poiret.<note place='foot'>Upham, <q>Life, Religious Opinions, and Experience of Madame de
la Mothe Guyon, with an account of Fénelon.</q> London, 1854. Brooke,
<q>Exemplary Life of the Pious Lady Guion.</q> Bristol, 1806. Butler,
<q>Life of Fénelon.</q> London, 1810.</note>
</p>

<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_157_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Mysticism Tinged with Theosophy and Pantheism.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Antoinette
Bourignon</emph>, the daughter of a rich merchant of Lille, in France, while
matron of a hospital in her native city, had in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1662 gathered
around her a party of believers in her theosophic and fantastic revelations.
She was obliged to flee to the Netherlands, and there, by
the force of her eloquence in speech and writing, spread her views
among the Protestants. Among them she attracted the great scientist
Swammerdam. But when she introduced politics, she escaped
imprisonment only by flight. Down to her death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1680 she
earnestly and successfully prosecuted her mission in north-west Germany.
Peter Poiret collected her writings and published them in
twenty-one volumes at Amsterdam, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1679.&mdash;Quite of another
sort was the pantheistic mysticism of <emph>Angelus Silesius</emph>. Originally a
Protestant physician at Breslau, he went over to the Romish church
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1653, and in consequence received from Vienna the honorary
title of physician to the emperor. He was made priest in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1661,
and till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1677 maintained a keen polemic against the
Protestant church with all a pervert's zeal. Most of his hymns belong
to his Protestant period. As a Catholic he wrote his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Cherubinischer
Wandersmann</foreign>,</q> a collection of rhymes in which, with childish
<foreign rend='italic'>naïveté</foreign> and hearty, gushing ardour, he merges self into the abyss of
the universal Deity, and develops a system of the most pronounced
pantheism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_157_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Jansenism in its first Stage.</emph>&mdash;Bishop Cornelius Jansen, of Ypres,
who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1638, gave the fruits of his lifelong studies of
Augustine in his learned work, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Augustinus s. doctr. Aug. de humanæ
Naturæ Sanitate, Ægritudine, et Medicina adv. Pelagianos et Massilienses</foreign>,</q>
which was published after his death in three volumes, Louvain, 1640.
The Jesuits induced Urban VIII., in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1642, to prohibit it in his bull
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In eminenti</foreign>. Augustine's numerous followers in France felt themselves
hit by this decree. Jansen's pupil at Port Royal from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1635,
Duvergier de Hauranne, usually called St. Cyran, from the Benedictine
monastery of which he was abbot, was the bitter foe of the Jesuits and
Richelieu, who had him cast into prison in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1638, from which he
was liberated after the death of the cardinal in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1643, and shortly
before his own. Another distinguished member of the party was
Antoine Arnauld, doctor of the Sorbonne, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1694, the
youngest of twenty children of a parliamentary advocate, whose
powerful defence of the University of Paris against the Jesuits called
forth their hatred and lifelong persecution. His mantle, as a vigorous
polemist, had fallen upon his youngest son. Very important too was
the influence of his much older sister, Angelica Arnauld, Abbess of
the Cistercian cloister of Port Royal des Champs, six miles from Paris,
which under her became the centre of religious life and effort for all
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
France. Around her gathered some of the noblest, most pious, and
talented men of the time: the poet Racine, the mathematician and
apologist Pascal, the Bible translator De Sacy, the church historian
Tillemont, all ardent admirers of Augustine and determined opponents
of the lax morality of the Jesuits. Arnauld's book, <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>De la
fréquente Communion</foreign>,</q> was approved by the Sorbonne, the Parliament,
and the most distinguished of the French clergy; but in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1653 Innocent X.
condemned five Jansenist propositions in it as heretical. The
Augustinians now maintained that these doctrines were not taught
in the sense attributed to them by the pope. Arnauld distinguished
the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>question du fait</foreign> from the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>question du droit</foreign>, maintaining that the
latter only were subject to the judgment of the Holy See. The
Sorbonne, now greatly changed in composition and character, expelled
him on account of this position from its corporation in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1656.
About this time, at Arnauld's instigation, Pascal, the profound and
brilliant author of <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Pensées sur la Religion</foreign>,</q> began, under the name of
Louis de Montalte to publish his famous <q>Provincial Letters,</q> which in
an admirable style exposed and lashed with deep earnestness and biting
wit the base moral principles of Jesuit casuistry. The truly annihilating
effect of these letters upon the reputation of the powerful order
could not be checked by their being burnt by order of Parliament
by the hangman at Aix in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1657, and at Paris in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1660. But
meanwhile the specifically Jansenist movement entered upon a new
phase of its development. Alexander VII. had issued in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1656 a
bull which denounced the application of the distinction <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>du fait</foreign> and <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>du
droit</foreign> to the papal decrees as derogatory to the holy see, and affirmed
that Jansen taught the five propositions in the sense they had been
condemned. In order to enforce the sentence, Annal, the Jesuit father
confessor of Louis XIV., obtained in 1661 a royal decree requiring all
French clergy, monks, nuns, and teachers to sign a formula unconditionally
accepting this bull. Those who refused were banished, and
fled mostly to the Netherlands. The sorely oppressed nuns of Port
Royal at last reluctantly agreed to sign it; but they were still persecuted,
and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1664 the new archbishop, Perefixe, inaugurated a
more severe persecution, placed this cloister under the interdict, and
removed some of the nuns to other convents. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1669, Alexander's
successor, Clement IX., secured the submission of Arnauld, De Sacy,
Nicole, and many of the nuns by a policy of mild connivance. But
the hatred of the Jesuits was still directed against their cloister.
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1705 Clement XI. again demanded full and unconditioned
acceptance of the decree of Alexander VII., and when the nuns
refused, the pope, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1708, declared this convent an irredeemable
nest of heresy, and ordered its suppression, which was carried out
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1709. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1710 cloister and church were levelled to the
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
ground, and the very corpses taken out of their graves.<note place='foot'>Beard, <q>Port Royal.</q> 2 vols. London, 1861. St. Amour,
<q>Journal in France and Rome, containing Account of Five Points of
Controversy between Jansenists and Molinists.</q> London, 1664.
Schimmelpenninck, <q>Select Memoirs of Port Royal.</q> Fourth edition.
2 vols. London, 1835.</note>&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>§ 165, 7</ref>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 158. Science and Art in the Catholic Church.</head>

<p>
Catholic theology flourished during the seventeenth century
as it had never done since the twelfth and thirteenth.
Especially in the liberal Gallican church there was a vigorous
scientific life. The Parisian Sorbonne and the orders of the
Jesuits, St. Maur, and the Oratorians, excelled in theological,
particularly in patristic and historical, learning, and the
contemporary brilliancy of Reformed theology in France
afforded a powerful stimulus. But the best days of art,
especially Italian painting, were now past. Sacred music
was diligently cultivated, though in a secularized style, and
many gifted hymn-writers made their appearance in Spain
and Germany.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_158_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Theological Science (§ 149, 14).</emph>&mdash;The parliamentary advocate,
Mich. le Jay, published at his own expense the Parisian Polyglott in
ten folio vols., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1629-1645, which, besides complete Syriac and Arabic
translations, included also the Samaritan. The chief contributor was
the Oratorian <emph>Morinus</emph>, who edited the LXX. and the Samaritan texts,
which he regarded as incomparably superior to the Masoretic text corrupted
by the Jews. The Jansenists produced a French translation of
the Bible with practical notes, condemned by the pope, but much read
by the people. It was mainly the work of the brothers <emph>De Sacy</emph>. The
New Testament was issued in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1667 and the Old Testament somewhat
later, called the Bible of Mons from the fictitious name of the place of
publication. <emph>Richard Simon</emph>, the Oratorian, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1712, treated
Scripture with a boldness of criticism never before heard of within
the church. While opposed by many on the Catholic side, the curia
favoured his work as undermining the Protestant doctrine of Scripture.
<emph>Cornelius à Lapide</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1637, expounded Scripture according
to the fourfold sense.&mdash;In systematic theology the old scholastic
method still held sway. Moral theology was wrought out in the form
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
of casuistry with unexampled lasciviousness, especially by the Jesuits
(§ 149, 10). The work of the Spaniard <emph>Escobar</emph>, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1669,
ran through fifty editions, and that of <emph>Busembaum</emph>, professor in Cologne
and afterwards rector of Münster, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1668, went through
seventy editions. On account of the attempted assassination of Louis
XV. by Damiens in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1757, with which the Jesuits and their doctrine
of tyrannicide were charged, the Parliament of Toulouse in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1757,
and of Paris in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1761, had Busembaum's book publicly burnt, and
several popes, Alexander VII., VIII., and Innocent XI., condemned
a number of propositions from the moral writings of these and other
Jesuits. Among polemical writers the most distinguished were
<emph>Becanus</emph>, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1624, and <emph>Bossuet</emph> (<ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>§ 153, 7</ref>). Among the
Jansenists the most prominent controversialists were <emph>Nicole</emph> and
<emph>Arnauld</emph>, who, in order to escape the reproach of Calvinism, sought to
prove the Catholic doctrine of the supper to be the same as that of the
apostles, and were answered by the Reformed theologians Claude and
Jurieu. In apologetics the leading place is occupied by <emph>Pascal</emph>, with
his brilliant <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Pensées</foreign>.</q> <emph>Huetius</emph>, a French bishop and editor of Origen,
who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1721, replied to Spinoza's attacks on the Pentateuch,
and applying to reason itself the Cartesian principle, that philosophy
must begin with doubt, pointed the doubter to the supernatural
revealed truths in the Catholic church as the only anchor of salvation.
The learned Jesuit <emph>Dionysius Petavius</emph>, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1652, edited
Epiphanius and wrote gigantic chronological works and numerous
violent polemics against Calvinists and Jansenists. His chief work is
the unfinished patristic-dogmatic treatise in five vols. folio, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1680,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De theologicis Dogmatibus</foreign>.</q> The Oratorian <emph>Thomassinus</emph> wrote an able
archæological work: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vetus et Nova Eccl. Disciplina circa Beneficia et
Beneficiarios</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_158_Para_2'/>
2. In church history, besides those named in § 5, 2, we may mention
Pagi, the keen critic and corrector of Baronius. The study of sources
was vigorously pursued. We have collections of mediæval writings
and documents by Sirmond, D'Achery, Mabillon, Martène, Baluzius;
of acts of councils by Labbé and Cossart, those of France by <emph>Jac.
Sirmond</emph>, and of Spain by Aguirre; acts of the martyrs by <emph>Ruinart</emph>;
monastic rules by <emph>Holstenius</emph>, a pervert, who became Vatican librarian,
and died at Rome <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1661. <emph>Dufresne Ducange</emph>, an advocate, who died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1688, wrote glossaries of the mediæval and barbarous Latin
and Greek, indispensable for the study of documents belonging to
those times. The greatest prodigy of learning was <emph>Mabillon</emph>, who died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1707, a Benedictine of St. Maur, and historian of his order.
<emph>Pet. de Marca</emph>, who died Archbishop of Paris <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1662, wrote the famous
work on the Gallican liberties <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Concordia Sacerdotii et Imperii</foreign>.</q> The
Jansenist doctor of the Sorbonne, <emph>Elias du Pin</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1719, wrote
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Nouvelle Bibliothèque des Auteurs Eccles.</foreign></q> in forty-seven vols. The
Jesuit Maimbourg, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1686, compiled several party histories of
Wiclifism, Lutheranism, and Calvinism; but as a Gallican was deprived
of office by the pope, and afterwards supported by a royal pension. The
Antwerp Jesuits Bolland, Henschen, Papebroch started, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1643,
the gigantic work <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Acta Sanctorum</foreign>,</q> carried on by the learned members
of their order in Belgium, known as <emph>Bollandists</emph>. It was stopped by
the French invasion of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1794, when it had reached October 15th
with the fifty-third folio vol. The Belgian Jesuits continued the work
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1845-1867, reaching in six vols. the end of October, but not
displaying the ability and liberality of their predecessors. In Venice
<emph>Paul Sarpi</emph> (<ref target='Section_155_Para_2'>§ 155, 2</ref>) wrote a history of the Tridentine Council, one of
the most brilliant historical works of any period. <emph>Leo Allatius</emph>, a
Greek convert at Rome, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1669, wrote a work to show
the agreement of the Eastern and Western churches. Cardinal <emph>Bona</emph>
distinguished himself as a liturgical writer.&mdash;In France pulpit eloquence
reached the highest pitch in such men as Flechier, Bossuet,
Bourdaloue, Fénelon, Massillon, and Bridaine. In Vienna <emph>Abraham à
St. Clara</emph> inveighed in a humorous, grotesque way against the corruption
of manners, with an undercurrent of deep moral earnestness. Similar
in style and spirit, but much more deeply sunk in Catholic superstition,
was his contemporary the Capuchin <emph>Martin of Cochem</emph>, who
missionarized the Rhine Provinces and western Germany for forty
years, and issued a large number of popular religious tracts.&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>§ 165, 14</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_158_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Art and Poetry (§ 149, 15).</emph>&mdash;The greatest master of the musical
school founded by Palestrina was <emph>Allégri</emph>, whose <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Miserere</foreign> is performed
yearly on the Wednesday afternoon of Passion Week in the Sistine
Chapel in Rome. The oratorio originated from the application of the
lofty music of this school to dramatic scenes drawn from the Bible, for
purely musical and not theatrical performance. Philip Neri patronized
this music freely in his oratory, from which it took the name. This
new church music became gradually more and more secularized and
approximated to the ordinary opera style.&mdash;In <emph>ecclesiastical architecture</emph>
the Renaissance style still prevailed, but debased with senseless, tasteless
ornamentation.&mdash;In the Italian school of <emph>painting</emph> the decline, both
in creative power and imitative skill, was very marked from the end
of the sixteenth century. In Spain during the seventeenth century
religious painting reached a high point of excellence in Murillo of
Seville, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1682, a master in representing calm meditation
and entranced felicity.&mdash;The two greatest <emph>poets</emph> of Spain, the creators
of the Spanish drama, <emph>Lope de Vega</emph> (died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1635) and <emph>Pedro Calderon</emph>
(died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1681), both at first soldiers and afterwards priests, flourished
during this century. The elder excelled the younger, not only in
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
fruitfulness and versatility (1,500 comedies, 320 autos, § 115, 12, etc.),
but also in poetic genius and patriotism. Calderon, with his 122
dramas, 73 festival plays, 200 preludes, etc., excelled De Vega in
artistic expression and beauty of imagery. Both alike glorify the
Inquisition, but occasionally subordinate Mary and the saints to the
great redemption of the cross.&mdash;Specially deserving of notice is the
noble German Jesuit <emph>Friedr. von Spee</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1635. His spiritual
songs show deep love to the Saviour and a profound feeling for
nature, approaching in some respects the style of the evangelical
hymn-writers. Spee was a keen but unsuccessful opponent of witch
prosecution. Another eminent poetic genius of the age was the
Jesuit <emph>Jac. Balde</emph> of Munich, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1688. He is at his best
in lyrical poetry. A deep religious vein runs through all his Latin
odes, in which he enthusiastically appeals to the Virgin to raise him
above all earthly passions. To Herder belongs the merit of rescuing
him from oblivion.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. The Lutheran Church.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_159'/>
<head>§ 159. Orthodoxy and its Battles.<note place='foot'>Dorner, <q>History of Protestant Theology,</q> vol. ii., pp. 98-251.</note></head>

<p>
The Formula of Concord commended itself to the hearts
and intelligences of Lutherans, and secured a hundred years'
supremacy of orthodoxy, notwithstanding two Christological
controversies. Gradually, however, a new dogmatic scholasticism
arose, which had the defects as well as the
excellences of the mediæval system. The orthodoxy of this
school deteriorated, on the one hand, into violent polemic
on confessional differences, and, on the other, into undue
depreciation of outward forms in favour of a spiritual life
and personal piety. These tendencies are represented by
the Syncretist and Pietist controversies.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_159_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Christological Controversies.</emph>&mdash;(1) <emph>The Cryptist and Kenotist Controversy</emph>
between the Giessen and Tübingen theologians, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1619, about
Christ's state of humiliation, led to the publication of many violent
treatises down to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1626. The Kenotists of Giessen, with Mentzer
and Feuerborn at their head, assigned the humiliation only to the
human nature, and explained it as an actual κένωσις, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a complete
but voluntary resigning of the omnipresence and omnipotence immanent
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
in His divinity (κτῆσις, but not χρῆσις), yet so that He could
have them at His command at any moment, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> in His miracles. The
Cryptists of Tübingen, with Luc. Osiander and Thumm at their head,
ascribed humiliation to both natures, and taught that all the while
Christ, even <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>secundum carnem</foreign>, was omnipresent and ruled both in heaven
and earth, but in a hidden way; the humiliation is no κένωσις, but only
a κρύψις. After repeated unsuccessful attempts to bring about a reconciliation,
John George, Elector of Saxony, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1623, accepted the
Kenotic doctrine. But the two parties still continued their strife.<note place='foot'>Bruce, <q>Humiliation of Christ,</q> p. 131. Edin., 1876.</note>&mdash;2.
<emph>The Lütkemann Controversy</emph> on the humanity of Christ in death was
of far less importance. Lütkemann, a professor of philosophy at
Rostock, affirmed that in death, because the unity of soul and body
was broken, Christ was not true man, and that to deny this was to
destroy the reality and the saving power of his death. He held that
the incarnation of Christ lasted through death, because the divine
nature was connected, not only with the soul, but also with the body.
Lütkemann was obliged to quit Rostock, but got an honourable call
to Brunswick as superintendent and court preacher, and there died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1655. Later Lutherans treated the controversy as a useless
logomachy.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_159_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Syncretist Controversy.</emph>&mdash;Since the Hofmann controversy
(§ 141, 15) the University of Helmstadt had shown a decided humanistic
tendency, and gave even greater freedom in the treatment of
doctrines than the Formula of Concord, which it declined to adopt. To
this school belonged <emph>George Calixt</emph>, and from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1614 for forty years
he laboured in promoting its interests. He was a man of wide culture
and experience, who had obtained a thorough knowledge of church
history, and acquaintance with the most distinguished theologians of
all churches, during his extensive foreign travels, and therewith a
geniality and breadth of view not by any means common in those
days. He did not indeed desire any formal union between the different
churches, but rather a mutual recognition, love, and tolerance. For
this purpose he set, as a secondary principle of Christian theology,
besides Scripture, as the primary principle, the consensus of the first
five centuries as the common basis of all churches, and sought to
represent later ecclesiastical differences as unessential or of less consequence.
This was denounced by strict Lutherans as Syncretism and
Cryptocatholicism. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1639 the Hanoverian preacher Buscher
charged him with being a secret Papist. After the Thorn Conference
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645, a violent controversy arose, which divided Lutherans into
two camps. On the one side were the universities of Helmstadt and
Königsberg; on the other hand, the theologians of the electorate of
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
Saxony, Hülsemann of Leipzig, Waller of Dresden, and Abr. Calov,
who died professor in Wittenberg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1686. Calov wrote twenty-six
controversial treatises on this subject. Jena vainly sought to mediate
between the parties. In the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Theologorum Sax. Consensus repetitus Fidei
vera Lutheranæ</foreign> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1655, for which the Wittenberg divines failed
to secure symbolical authority, the following sentiments were branded
as Syncretist errors: That in the Apostles' Creed everything is taught
that is necessary to salvation; that the Catholic and Reformed systems
retain hold of fundamental truths; that original sin is of a merely
privative nature; that God <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>indirecte, improprie, et per accidens</foreign> is the
cause of sin; that the doctrine of the Trinity was first clearly revealed
in the New Testament, etc. Calixt died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1656 in the midst of most
violent controversies. His son Ulrich continued these, but had neither
the ability nor moderation of his father. Even the peaceably disposed
Conference of Cassel of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1661 (<ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>§ 154, 4</ref>) only poured oil on the
flames. The strife lost itself at last in actions for damages between
the younger Calixt and his bitter opponent Strauch of Wittenberg.
Wearied of these fruitless discussions, theologians now turned their
attention to the rising movement of Pietism.<note place='foot'>Dowding, <q>German Theology during the Thirty Years' War:
Life and Correspondence of G. Calixt.</q> 2 vols. Oxford, 1863.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_159_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Pietist Controversy in its First Stage.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Philip Jacob Spener</emph>
born in Alsace in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1635, was in his thirty-first year, on account of
his spirituality, distinguished gifts, and singularly wide scholarship,
made president of a clerical seminary at Frankfort-on-Main. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1686 he became chief court preacher at Dresden, and provost of Berlin
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1691, when, on account of his intense earnestness in pastoral
work, he had been expelled from Dresden. He died in Berlin in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1705. His year's attendance at Geneva after the completion of his
curriculum at Strassburg had an important influence on his whole
future career. He there learned to value discipline for securing purity
of life as well as of doctrine, and was also powerfully impressed by
the practical lectures of Labadie (<ref target='Section_163_Para_7'>§ 163, 7</ref>) and the reading of the
<q>Practice of Piety</q> and other ascetical writings of the English
Puritans (<ref target='Section_162_Para_3'>§ 162, 3</ref>). Though strongly attached to the Lutheran
church, he believed that in the restoration of evangelical doctrine by
the Wittenberg Reformation, <q>not by any means had all been accomplished
that needed to be done,</q> and that Lutheranism in the form of
the orthodoxy of the age had lost the living power of the reformers,
and was in danger of burying its talent in dead and barren service of
the letter. There was therefore a pressing need of a new and wider
reformation. In the Lutheran church, as the depository of sound
doctrine, he recognised the fittest field for the development of a
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
genuinely Christian life; but he heartily appreciated any true spiritual
movement in whatsoever church it arose. He went back from
scholastic dogmatics to Holy Scripture as the living source of saving
knowledge, substituted for the external orthodox theology the theology
of the heart, demanded evidence of this in a pious Christian walk:
these were the means by which he sought to promote his reformation.
A whole series of Lutheran theologians of the seventeenth century
(<ref target='Section_159'>§ 159</ref>) had indeed contributed to this same end by their devotional
works, hymns, and sermons. What was new in Spener was the conviction
of the insufficiency of the hitherto used means and the undue
prominence given to doctrine, and his consequent effort vigorously
made to raise the tone of the Christian life. In his childlike, pious
humility he regarded himself as by no means called to carry out
this work, but felt it his duty to insist upon the necessity of it, and
indicate the means that should be used to realize it. This he did in
his work of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1675, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pia Desideria</foreign>.</q> As it was his aim to recommend
biblical practical Christianity to the heart of the individual
Christian, he revived the almost forgotten doctrine <q>Of Spiritual
Priesthood</q> in a separate treatise. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1670 he began to have
meetings in his own house for encouraging Christian piety in the
community, which soon were imitated in other places. Spener's influence
on the Lutheran church became greater and wider through his
position at Dresden. Stirred up by his spirit, three young graduates
of Leipzig. A. H. Francke, Paul Anton, and J. K. Schade, formed in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1686 a private <hi rend='italic'>Collegia Philobiblica</hi> for practical exposition of
Scripture and the delivery of public exegetical lectures at the university
in the German language. But the Leipzig theological faculty,
with J. B. Carpzov II. at its head, charged them with despising the
public ordinances as well as theological science, and with favouring
the views of separatists. The <hi rend='italic'>Collegia Philobiblica</hi> was suppressed, and
the three friends obliged to leave Leipzig in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1690. This marked
the beginning of the Pietist controversies. Soon afterwards Spener
was expelled from Dresden; but in his new position at Berlin he secured
great influence in the appointments to the theological faculty of the
new university founded at Halle by the peace-loving elector Frederick
III. of Brandenburg, in opposition to the contentious universities of
Wittenberg and Leipzig. Francke, Anton, and Breithaupt were made
professors of theology. Halle now won the position which Wittenberg
and Geneva had held during the Reformation period, and the Pietist
controversy thus entered upon a second, more general, and more critical
epoch of its history.<note place='foot'>Wildenhahn, <q>Life of Spener,</q> translated by Wenzel. Philadelphia,
1881. Guericke, <q>Life of A. H. Francke.</q> London, 1847.</note>&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_166_Para_1'>§ 166, 1</ref>.
</p>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_159_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Theological Literature (§ 142, 6).</emph>&mdash;The <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Philologia Sacra</foreign></q> of <emph>Sol.
Glassius</emph> of Jena, published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1623, has ranked as a classical work
for almost two centuries. From <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1620 till the end of the century,
a lively controversy was carried on about the Greek style of the New
Testament, in which Lutherans, and especially the Reformed, took part.
The purists maintained that the New Testament idiom was pure and
classical, thinking that its inspiration would otherwise be endangered.
The first historico-critical introduction to the Scriptures was the
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Officina Biblica</foreign></q> of Walther in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1636. <emph>Pfeiffer</emph> of Leipzig gained
distinction in biblical criticism and hermeneutics by his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Critica
Sacra</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1680 and <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hermeneutica</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1684. Exegesis now
made progress, notwithstanding its dependence on traditional interpretations
of doctrinal proof passages and its mechanical theory of inspiration.
The most distinguished exegetes were <emph>Erasmus Schmidt</emph> of
Wittenberg, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1637: he wrote a Latin translation of New
Testament with admirable notes, and a very useful concordance of the
Greek New Testament, under the title Ταμεῖον, which has been revised
and improved by Bruder; <emph>Seb. Schmidt</emph> of Strassburg, who wrote commentaries
on several Old Testament books and on the Pauline epistles;
and <emph>Abr. Calov</emph> of Wittenberg, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1686, in his 74th year,
whose <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Biblia Illustrata</foreign></q> in four vols., is a work of amazing research
and learning, but composed wholly in the interests of dogmatics.&mdash;Little
was done in the department of church history. Calixt awakened a
new enthusiasm for historical studies, and <emph>Gottfried Arnold</emph> (<ref target='Section_159_Para_2'>§ 159, 2</ref>),
pietist, chiliast, and theosophist, bitterly opposed to every form of
orthodoxy, and finding true Christianity only in sects, separatists, and
heretics, set the whole theological world astir by his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Unparteiische
Kirchen- und Ketzer-historie</foreign>,</q> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1699 (§ 5, 3).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_159_Para_5'/>
5. The orthodox school applied itself most diligently to dogmatics in
a strictly scholastic form. <emph>Hutter</emph> of Wittenberg, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1616,
wrote <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loci communes theologici</foreign></q> and <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Compendium Loc. Theol.</foreign></q> <emph>John
Gerhard</emph> of Jena, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1637, published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1610 his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loc.
Theologici</foreign></q> in nine folio vols., the standard of Lutheran orthodoxy.
<emph>J. Andr. Quenstedt</emph> of Wittenberg, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1688, exhibited the best
and worst of Lutheran scholasticism in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Theol. didactico-polemica</foreign>.</q>
The most important dogmatist of the Calixtine school was Conrad
Horneius. Calixt himself is known as a dogmatist only by his lectures;
but to him we owe the generally adopted distinction between morals and
dogmatics as set forth in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Epitome theol. Moralis</foreign>.</q>&mdash;Polemics
were carried on vigorously. <emph>Hoë von Hoënegg</emph> of Dresden (§ 154, <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>4</ref>)
and <emph>Hutter</emph> of Wittenberg were bitter opponents of Calvinism and
Romanism. Hutter was styled by his friends <emph>Malleus Calvinistorum</emph>
and <emph>Redonatus Lutherus</emph>. The ablest and most dignified polemic against
Romanism was that of <emph>John Gerhard</emph> in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Catholica</foreign>.</q>
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
<emph>Nich. Hunnius</emph>, son of Ægid. Hunnius, and Hutter's successor at Wittenberg,
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1623 superintendent at Lübeck, distinguished himself
as an able controversialist against the papacy by his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Demonstratio
Ministerii Lutherani Divini atque Legitimi</foreign>.</q> Against the Socinians he
wrote his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Examen Errorum Photinianorum</foreign>,</q> and against the fanatics
a <q>Chr. Examination of the new Paracelsist and Weigelian Theology.</q>
His principal work is his <q><foreign rend='italic'>Διάσκεψις de Fundamentali Dissensu Doctrinæ
Luth. et Calvin</foreign>.</q> His <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Epitome Credendorum</foreign></q> went through
nineteen editions. The most incessant controversialist was <emph>Abr. Calov</emph>,
who wrote against Syncretists, Papists, Socinians, Arminians, etc.&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>§ 167, 4</ref>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 160. The Religious Life.</head>

<p>
The attachment of the Lutheran church of this age to pure
doctrine led to a one-sided over-estimation of it, often ending
in dead orthodoxy. But a succession of able and learned
theologians, who recognised the importance of heart theology
as well as sound doctrine, corrected this evil tendency by
Scripture study, preaching, and faithful pastoral work. A
noble and moderate mysticism, which was thoroughly orthodox
in its beliefs, and opposing orthodoxy only where that
had become external and mechanical, had many influential
representatives throughout the whole country, especially
during the first half of it. But also separatists, mystics, and
theosophists made their appearance, who were decidedly
hostile to the church. Sacred song flourished afresh amid
the troubles of the Thirty Years' War; but gradually lost its
sublime objective church character, which was poorly compensated
by a more flowing versification, polished language,
and elegant form. A corresponding advance was also made
in church music.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_160_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Mysticism and Asceticism.</emph>&mdash;At the head of the orthodox mystics
stands <emph>John Arndt</emph>. His <q>True Christianity</q> and his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Paradiesgärtlein</foreign></q>
are the most widely read Lutheran devotional books, but
called forth the bitter hostility of those devoted to the maintenance
of a barren orthodoxy. He died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1621, as general superintendent
at Celle. He had been expelled from Anhalt because he would
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
not condemn exorcism as godless superstition, and was afterwards
in Brunswick publicly charged by his colleague Denecke and other
Lutheran zealots with Papacy, Calvinism, Osiandrianism, Flacianism,
Schwenckfeldism, Paracelsism, Alchemism, etc. As men of a similar
spirit, anticipators of the school of Spener, may be named <emph>John Gerhard</emph>
of Jena, with his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Meditationes Sacræ</foreign></q> and <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schola pietatis</foreign></q> and
<emph>Christian Scriver</emph>, whose <q>Gotthold's Emblems</q> is well known to
English readers. <emph>Rahtmann</emph> of Danzig maintained that the word
of God in Scripture has not in itself the power to enlighten and
convert men except through the gracious influence of God's Spirit.
He was supported, after a long delay, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1626 by the University
of Rostock, but opposed by Königsberg, Jena, and Wittenberg. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1628, the Elector of Saxony obtained the opinion of the most famous
theologians of his realm against Rahtmann; but his death, which
soon followed, brought the controversy to a close.&mdash;The Württemberg
theologian, <emph>John Valentine Andreä</emph>, grandson of one of the authors of
the Formula of Concord, was a man of striking originality, famous
for his satires on the corruptions of the age. His <q>Order of Rosicrucians,</q>
published at Cassel in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1614, ridiculed the absurdities
of astrology and alchemy in the form of a satirical romance. His
influence on the church of his times was great and wholesome, so that
even Spener exclaimed: <q>Had I the power to call any one from the
dead for the good of the church, it would be J. V. Andreä.</q> His
later devotional work was almost completely forgotten until attention
was called to it by Herder.<note place='foot'>Jennings, <q>The Rosicrucians: their Rites and Mysteries.</q> London,
1887.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_160_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Mysticism and Theosophy.</emph>&mdash;A mystico-theosophical tendency,
partly in outward connexion with the church, partly without and
in open opposition to it, was fostered by the alchemist writings of
Agrippa and Paracelsus, the theosophical works of Weigel (§ 146, 2)
and by the profound revelations of the inspired shoemaker of Görlitz,
<emph>Jacob Boehme</emph>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>philosophus teutonicus</foreign>, the most talented of all the
theosophists. In a remarkable degree he combined a genius for
speculation with the most unfeigned piety that held firmly by the old
Lutheran faith. Even when an itinerant tradesman, he felt himself
for a period of seven days in calm repose, surrounded by the divine
light. But he dates his profound theosophical enlightenment from
a moment in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1594, when as a young journeyman and married,
thrown into an ecstasy, he obtained a knowledge of the divine mysteries
down to the ultimate principles of all things and their inmost
quality. His theosophy, too, like that of the ancient gnostics, springs
out of the question about the origin of evil. He solves it by assuming
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
an emanation of all things from God, in whom fire and light, bitter
and sweet qualities, are thoroughly tempered and perfectly combined,
while in the creature derived by emanation from him they are in
disharmony, but are reconciled and reduced to godlike harmony
through regeneration in Christ. Though opposed by Calov, he was
befriended by the Dresden consistory. Boehme died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1624, in
retirement at Görlitz, in the arms of his family.<note place='foot'>Martensen, <q>Life and Works of Jacob Boehme.</q> London, 1886.</note>&mdash;In close connexion
with Boehmists, separatists, and Pietists, yet differing from them all,
<emph>Gottfried Arnold</emph> abused orthodoxy and canonized the heretics of all
ages. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1700 he wrote <q>The Mystery of the Divine Sophia.</q>
When Adam, originally man and woman, fell, his female nature, the
heavenly Sophia, was taken from him, and in his place a woman of
flesh was made for him out of a rib; in order again to restore the
paradisiacal perfection Christ brought again the male part into a
virgin's womb, so that the new creature, the regenerate, stands before
God as a <q>male-virgin</q>; but carnal love destroys again the connexion
thus secured with the heavenly Sophia. But the very next
year he reached a turning-point in his life. He not only married, but
in consequence accepted several appointments in the Lutheran church,
without, however, signing the Formula of Concord, and applied his
literary skill to the production of devotional tracts.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_160_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Sacred Song (§ 142, 3).</emph>&mdash;The first epoch of the development of
sacred song in this century corresponds to the period of the Thirty
Years' War, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1618-1648. The Psalms of David were the model
and pattern of the sacred poets, and the profoundest songs of the cross
and consolation bear the evident impress of the times, and so individual
feeling comes more into prominence. The influence of Opitz was also
felt in the church song, in the greater attention given to correctness
and purity of language and to the careful construction of verse and
rhyme. Instead of the rugged terseness and vigour of earlier days,
we now find often diffuse and overflowing utterances of the heart.
<emph>John Hermann</emph> of Glogau, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1647, composed 400 songs,
embracing these: <q>Alas! dear Lord, what evil hast Thou done?</q>;
<q>O Christ, our true and only Light</q>; <q>Ere yet the dawn hath
filled the skies</q>; <q>O God, thou faithful God.</q> <emph>Paul Flemming</emph>,
a physician in Holstein, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1640, wrote on his
journey to Persia, <q>Where'er I go, whate'er my task.</q> <emph>Matthew
Meyffart</emph>, professor and pastor at Erfurt, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1642,
wrote <q>Jerusalem, thou city fair and high.</q> <emph>Martin Rinkart</emph>, pastor
at Eilenburg in Saxony, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1648, wrote, <q>Now thank
we all our God.</q> <emph>Appelles von Löwenstern</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1648, composed,
<q>When anguished and perplexed, with many a sigh and
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
tear.</q> <emph>Joshua Stegmann</emph>, superintendent in Rinteln, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1632, wrote, <q>Abide among us with thy grace.</q> <emph>Joshua Wegelin</emph>,
pastor in Augsburg and Pressburg, wrote, <q>Since Christ is gone to
heaven, his home.</q> <emph>Justus Gesenius</emph>, superintendent in Hanover, who
died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1673, wrote, <q>When sorrow and remorse.</q> <emph>Tob. Clausnitzer</emph>,
pastor in the Palatinate, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1648, wrote, <q>Blessed
Jesus, at thy word.</q> The poets named mostly belong to the first
Silesian school gathered round Opitz. A more independent position,
though not uninfluenced by Opitz, is taken up by <emph>John Rist</emph>, who died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1667. He composed 658 sacred songs, of which many are remarkable
for their vigour, solemnity, and elevation; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> <q>Arise, the
kingdom is at hand</q>; <q>Sink not yet, my soul, to slumber</q>; <q>O living
Bread from heaven</q>; <q>Praise and thanks to Thee be sung.</q> At the
head of the Königsberg school of the same age stood <emph>Simon Dach</emph>, professor
of poetry at Königsberg, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1659. He composed
150 spiritual songs, among which the best known are, <q>O how blessed,
faithful souls, are ye!</q> <q>Wouldest thou inherit life with Christ on
high?</q> The most distinguished members of this school are: <emph>Henry
Alberti</emph>, organist at Königsberg, author of <q>God who madest earth and
heaven</q>; and <emph>George Weissel</emph>, pastor in Königsberg, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1655, author of <q>Lift up your heads, ye mighty gates.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_160_Para_4'/>
4. From the middle of the seventeenth century sacred song became
more subjective, and so tended to fall into a diversity of groups. No
longer does the church sing through its poets, but the poets give direct
expression to their individual feelings. Confessional songs are less
frequent, and their place is taken by hymns of edification with reference
to various conditions of life; songs of death, the cross and consolation,
and hymns for the family become more numerous. With
objectivity special features of the church song disappear in the hymns
of the period; but some of its essential characteristics remain,
especially the popular form and contents, the freshness, liveliness, and
simplicity of diction, the truths of personal experience, the fulness
of faith, etc. We distinguish three groups: (1) <emph>The Transition Group</emph>,
passing from objectivity to subjectivity. Its greatest masters, indeed
after Luther the greatest sacred poet of the evangelical church, is
undoubtedly <emph>Paul Gerhardt</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1676, the faith witness of
the Lutheran faith under the wars and in persecution (<ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>§ 154, 4</ref>). In
him we find the new subjective tendency in its noblest form; but there
is also present the old objective style, giving immediate expression to
the consciousness of the church, adhering tenaciously to the confession,
and a grand popular ring that reminds us of the fulness and power
of Luther. His 131 songs, if not all church songs in the narrower
sense, are almost all genuine poems: <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> <q>All my heart this night
rejoices</q>; <q>Cometh sunshine after rain</q>; <q>Go forth, my heart, and
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
seek delight</q>; <q>Be thou content: be still before</q>; <q>O world,
behold upon the tree</q>; <q>Now all the woods are sleeping</q>; and <q>Ah,
wounded head, must thou?</q> based on Bernard's <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Salve, caput cruentatum</foreign>.
To this school also belongs <emph>George Neumark</emph>, librarian at Weimar, who
died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1681, author of <q>Leave God to order all thy ways.</q> Also
<emph>John Franck</emph>, burgomaster at Guben in Lusatia, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1677,
next to Gerhardt the greatest poet of his age. His 110 songs are
less popular and hearty, but more melodious than Gerhardt's; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
<q>Redeemer of the nations, come</q>; <q>Ye heavens, oh haste your dews
to shed</q>; <q>Deck thyself, my soul, with gladness.</q> <emph>George Albinus</emph>,
pastor at Naumburg, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1679, wrote: <q>Not in anger smite us,
Lord</q>; <q>World, farewell! Of thee I'm tired.</q>&mdash;(2) The <emph>next stage</emph> of
the sacred song took the Canticles instead of the Psalter as its model.
The spiritual marriage of the soul is its main theme. Feeling and
fancy are predominant, and often degenerate into sentimentality and
trifling. It obtained a new impulse from the addition of a mystical
element. <emph>Angelus Silesius</emph> (<ref target='Section_156_Para_4'>§ 156, 4</ref>) was the most distinguished representative
of this school, and while Protestant he composed several
beautiful songs; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> <q>O Love, who formedst me to wear</q>; <q>Thou
holiest Love, whom most I love</q>; <q>Loving Shepherd, kind and true.</q>
<emph>Christian Knorr v. Rosenroth</emph>, who died at Sulzbach <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1689, wrote
<q>Dayspring of eternity.</q> <emph>Ludämilie Elizabeth</emph>, Countess of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt,
who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1672, wrote 215 <q>Songs of Jesus.</q>
<emph>Caspar Neumann</emph>, professor and pastor at Breslau, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1715,
wrote, <q>Lord, on earth I dwell in pain.</q>&mdash;(3) <emph>Those of Spener's Time
and Spirit</emph>, men who longed for the regeneration of the church by
practical Christianity. Their hymns are for the most part characterized
by healthy piety and deep godliness. Spener's own poems are of
slight importance. <emph>J. Jac. Schütz</emph>, Spener's friend, a lawyer in Frankfort,
who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1690, composed only one, but that a very beautiful
hymn: <q>All praise and thanks to God most high.</q> <emph>Samuel Rodigast</emph>,
rector in Berlin, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1708, wrote, <q>Whate'er my God ordains is
right.</q> <emph>Laurentius Laurentii</emph>, musical director at Bremen, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1722, wrote, <q>Is my heart athirst to know?</q> <q>O thou essential
Word.</q>&mdash;<emph>Gottfried Arnold</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1714, wrote, <q>Thou who breakest
every chain</q>; <q>How blest to all thy followers, Lord, the road!</q>&mdash;In
Denmark, where previously translations of German hymns were
used, <emph>Thomas Kingo</emph>, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1677 Bishop of Fünen, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1703, was
the much-honoured founder of Danish national hymnology.<note place='foot'>All the translations of hymns referred to in this and the preceding
section are from Miss Winkworth's <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lyra Germanica</foreign>.</q> London, 1885.</note>&mdash;Continuation,
§ 166, 6.
</p>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_160_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Sacred Music (§ 142, 5).</emph>&mdash;The church music in the beginning of the
seventeenth century was affected by the Italian school, just as church
song was by the influence of Opitz. The greatest master during the
transition stage was <emph>John Crüger</emph>, precentor in the church of St. Nicholas
in Berlin, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1662. He was to the chorale what Gerhardt
was to the church song. We have seventy-one new melodies of his,
admirably adapted to Gerhardt's, Hunnius's, Franck's, Dach's, and
Rinkart's songs, and used in the church till the present time. With the
second half of the century we enter on a new period, in which expression
and musical declamation perish. Choir singing now, to a great extent,
supersedes congregational singing. <emph>Henry Schütz</emph>, organist to the
Elector of Saxony, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1672, is the great master of this Italian
sacred concert style. He introduced musical compositions on passages
selected from the Psalms, Canticles, and prophets, in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Symphoniæ
Sacræ</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1629. After a short time a radical reform was
made by <emph>John Rosenmüller</emph>, organist of Wolfenbüttel, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1686.
A reaction against the exclusive adoption of the Italian style was
made by <emph>Andr. Hammerschmidt</emph>, organist at Zittau, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1675,
one of the noblest and most pious of German musicians. By working
up the old church melodies in the modern style, he brought the old
hymns again into favour, and set hymns of contemporary poets to
bright airs suited to modern standards of taste. The accomplished
musician <emph>Rud. Ahle</emph>, organist and burgomaster at Mühlhausen, died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1673, introduced his own beautiful airs into the church music for
Sundays and festivals. His sacred airs are distinguished for youthful
freshness and power, penetrated by a holy earnestness, and quite
free from that secularity and frivolousness which soon became unpleasantly
conspicuous in such music.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_167_Para_7'>§ 167, 7</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_160_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The Christian Life of the People.</emph>&mdash;The rich development of sacred
poetry proves the wonderful fulness and spirituality of the religious life
of this age, notwithstanding the many chilling separatistic controversies
that prevailed during the terrible upheaval of the Thirty Years' War.
The abundance of devotional literature of permanent worth witnesses
to the diligence and piety of the Lutheran pastors. Ernest the Pious
of Saxe-Gotha, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1675, stands forth as the ideal of a
Christian prince. For the Christian instruction of his people he issued,
in the midst of the confusion and horrors of the war, the famous Weimar
or Ernestine exposition of the Bible, upon which John Gerhard
wrought diligently, along with other distinguished Jena theologians.
It appeared first in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1641, and by <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1768 had gone through
fourteen large editions. A like service was done for South Germany
by the <q>Württemberg Summaries,</q> composed by three Württemberg
theologians at the request of Duke Eberhard III., a concise, practical
exposition of all the books of Scripture, which for a century and a
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
half formed the basis of the weekly services (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bibelstunden</foreign>) at Württemberg.&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>§ 167, 8</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_160_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Missions.</emph>&mdash;In the Lutheran church, missionary enterprise had
rather fallen behind (§ 142, 8). Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden carried
on the Lapp mission with new zeal, and Denmark, too, gave ready
assistance. A Norwegian pastor, Thomas Westen, deserves special
mention as the apostle of the mission. A German, Peter Heyling of
Lübeck, went on his own account as a missionary to Abyssinia in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1635, while several of his friends at the same time went to other eastern
lands. Of these others no trace whatever has been found. An
Abyssinian abbot who came to Europe brought news of Heyling. At
first he was hindered by the machinations of the Jesuits; but when
these were expelled, he found favour at court, became minister to the
king, and married one of the royal family. What finally came of him
and his work is unknown. Toward the end of the century two great
men, the philosopher Leibnitz and the founder of the Halle Orphanage,
A. H. Francke, warmly espoused the cause of foreign missions. The
ambitious and pretentious schemes of the philosopher ended in nothing,
but Francke made his orphanages, training colleges and centres from
which the German Lutheran missions to the heathens were vigorously
organized and successfully wrought.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>§ 167, 9</ref>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. The Reformed Church.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 161. Theology and its Battles.</head>

<p>
The Reformed scholars of France vied with those of St.
Maur and the Oratory, and the Reformed theologians of the
Netherlands, England, and Switzerland were not a whit
behind. But an attempt made at a general synod at Dort
to unite all the Reformed national churches under one
confession failed. Opposition to Calvin's extreme theory of
predestination introduced a Pelagianizing current into the
Reformed church, which was by no means confined to professed
Arminians. In the Anglican church this tendency
appeared in the forms of latitudinarianism and deism
(<ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>§ 164, 3</ref>); while in France it took a more moderate course,
and approximated rather to the Lutheran doctrine. It was
a reaction of latent Zwinglianism against the dominant Calvinism.
The Voetian school successfully opposed the introduction
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
of the Cartesian philosophy, and secured supremacy
to a scholasticism which held its own alongside of that of
the Lutherans. In opposition to it, the Cocceian federal
school undertook to produce a purely biblical system of
theology in all its departments.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_161_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Preliminaries of the Arminian Controversy.</emph>&mdash;In the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Belgica</foreign>
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1562 the Protestant Netherlands had already a strictly
Calvinistic symbol, but Calvinism had not thoroughly permeated
the church doctrine and constitution. There were more opponents
than supporters of the doctrine of predestination, and a Melanchthonian-synergistic
(§ 141, 7), or even an Erasmian-semipelagian,
(§ 125, 3) doctrine, of the freedom of the will and the efficacy of grace,
was more frequently taught and preached than the Augustinian-Calvinistic
doctrine. So also Zwingli's view of the relation of church
and state was in much greater favour than the Calvinistic Presbyterial
church government with its terrorist discipline. But the return
of the exiles in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1572, who had adopted strict Calvinistic views in
East Friesland and on the Lower German Rhine, led to the adoption
of a purely Calvinistic creed and constitution. The keenest opponent
of this movement was Coornhert, notary and secretary for the city of
Haarlem, who combated Calvinism in numerous writings, and depreciated
doctrine generally in the interests of practical living Christianity.
Political as well as religious sympathies were enlisted in
favour of this freer ecclesiastical tendency. The Dutch War of Independence
was a struggle for religious freedom against Spanish Catholic
fanaticism. The young republic therefore became the first home of
religious toleration, which was scarcely reconcilable with a strict and
exclusive Calvinism.&mdash;Meanwhile within the Calvinistic church a
controversy arose, which divided its adherents in the Netherlands
into two parties. In opposition to the strict Calvinists, who as supralapsarians
held that the fall itself was included in the eternal
counsels of God, there arose the milder infralapsarians, who made predestination
come in after the fall, which was not predestinated but
only foreseen by God.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_161_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Arminian Controversy.</emph>&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1588, James Arminius (born
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1560), a pupil of Beza, but a declared adherent of the Ramist
philosophy (§ 143, 6), was appointed pastor in Amsterdam, and
ordered by the magistrates to controvert Coornhert's universalism
and the infralapsarianism of the ministers of Delft. He therefore
studied Coornhert's writings, and by them was shaken in his earlier
beliefs. This was shown first in certain sermons on passages from
Romans, which made him suspected of Pelagianism. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1603 he
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
was made theological professor of Leyden, where he found a bitter
opponent in his supralapsarian colleague, Francis Gomarus. From
the class-rooms the controversy spread to the pulpits, and even into
domestic circles. A public disputation in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1608, led to no pacific
result, and Arminius continued involved in controversies till his death
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1609. Although decidedly inclined toward universalism, he
had directed his polemic mainly against supralapsarianism, as making
God himself the author of sin. But his followers went beyond these
limits. When denounced by the Gomarists as Pelagians, they addressed
to the provincial parliament of Holland and West Friesland,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1610, a remonstrance, which in five articles repudiates supralapsarianism
and infralapsarianism, and the doctrines of the irresistibility
of grace, and of the impossibility of the elect finally falling
away from it, and boldly asserts the universality of grace. They
were hence called Remonstrants and their opponents Contraremonstrants.
Parliament, favourably inclined toward the Arminians, pronounced
the difference non-fundamental, and enjoined peace. When
Vorstius, who was practically a Socinian, was appointed successor to
Arminius, Gomarus charged the Remonstrants with Socinianism.
Their ablest theological representative was Simon Episcopius, who
succeeded Gomarus at Leyden in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1612, supported by the distinguished
statesman, Oldenbarneveldt, and the great jurist, humanist,
and theologian, Hugo Grotius of Rotterdam. Maurice of Orange,
too, for a long time sided with them, but in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1617 formally went
over to the other party, whose well-knit unity, strict discipline, and
rigorous energy commended them to him as the fittest associates in
his struggle for absolute monarchy. The republican-Arminian party
was conquered, Oldenbarneveldt being executed in 1619, Grotius
escaping by his wife's strategem. <emph>The Synod of Dort</emph> was convened
for the purpose of settling doctrinal disputes. It held 154 sessions,
from Nov. 13th, 1618, to May 9th, 1619. Invitations were accepted
by twenty-eight theologians from England, Scotland, Germany, and
Switzerland. Brandenburg took no part in it (<ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>§ 154, 3</ref>), and French
theologians were refused permission to go. Episcopius presented a
clear and comprehensive apology for the Remonstrants, and bravely
defended their cause before the synod. Refusing to submit to the
decisions of the synod, they were at the fifty-seventh session expelled,
and then excommunicated and deprived of all ecclesiastical offices.
The Heidelberg Catechism and the Belgic Confession were unanimously
adopted as the creed and manual of orthodox teaching. In
the discussion of the five controverted points, the opposition of the
Anglican and German delegates prevented any open and manifest
insertion of supralapsarian theses, so that the synodal canons set
forth only an essentially infralapsarian theory of predestination.&mdash;Remonstrant
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
teachers were now expelled from most of the states of
the union. Only after Maurice's death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1625 did they venture
to return, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1630 they were allowed by statute to erect
churches and schools in all the states. A theological seminary at
Amsterdam, presided over by Episcopius till his death, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1643,
rose to be a famous seat of learning and nursery of liberal studies.
The number of congregations, however, remained small, and their
importance in church history consists rather in the development of
an independent church life than in the revival of a semipelagian and
rationalistic type of doctrine.<note place='foot'>The <q>Works of Arminius,</q> transl. by Nicholls, to which are added
Brandt's <q>Life of Arminius,</q> etc. 3 vols. London, 1825. Scott,
<q>Translation of Articles of Synod of Dort.</q> London, 1818. Hales,
<q>Letters from the Synod of Dort.</q> Glasgow, 1765. Calder, <q>Life of
Simon Episcopius.</q> New York, 1837. Cunningham, <q>Reformation
and Theology of Reformation</q>: Essay VIII., <q>Calvinism and Arminianism,</q>
pp. 412-470. Motley, <q>John of Barneveldt.</q> 2 vols.
London, 1874.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_161_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Consequences of the Arminian Controversy.</emph>&mdash;The Dort decrees were
not accepted in Brandenburg, Hesse, and Bremen, where a moderate
Calvinism continued to prevail. In England and Scotland the
Presbyterians enthusiastically approved of the decrees, whereas the
Episcopalians repudiated them, and, rushing to the other extreme of
latitudinarianism, often showed lukewarm indifferentism in the way
in which they distinguished articles of faith as essential and non-essential.
The worthiest of the latitudinarians of this age was
Chillingworth, who sought an escape from the contentions of theologians
in the Catholic church, but soon returned to Protestantism,
seeking and finding peace in God's word alone. Archbishop Tillotson
was a famous pulpit orator, and Gilbert Burnet, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1715, was author of a <q>History of the English Reformation.</q> In the
French Reformed church, where generally strict Calvinism prevailed,
<emph>Amyrault</emph> of Saumur, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1664, taught a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>universalismus
hypotheticus</foreign>, according to which God by a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>decretum universale et hypotheticum</foreign>
destined all men to salvation through Jesus Christ, even the
heathen, on the ground of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides implicita</foreign>. The only condition is
that they believe, and for this all the means are afforded in <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia
resistibilis</foreign>, while by a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>decretum absolutum et speciale</foreign> only to elect
persons is granted the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia irresistibilis</foreign>. The synods of Alençon,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1637, and Charenton, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1644, supported by Blondel, Daillé, and
Claude, declared these doctrines allowable; but Du Moulin of Sedan,
Rivetus and Spanheim of Leyden, Maresius of Groningen, and others,
offered violent opposition. Amyrault's colleague, <emph>De la Place</emph>, or
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
<emph>Placæus</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1655, went still further, repudiating the unconditional
imputation of Adam's sin, and representing original sin
simply as an evil which becomes guilt only as our own actual transgression.
The synods just named condemned this doctrine. Somewhat
later Claude <emph>Pajon</emph> of Saumur, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1685, roused a
bitter discussion about the universality of grace, by maintaining
that in conversion divine providence wrought only through the
circumstances of the life, and the Holy Spirit through the word of
God. Several French synods condemned this doctrine, and affirmed
an immediate as well as a mediate operation of the Spirit and providence.&mdash;Genuine
Calvinism was best represented in Switzerland, as
finally expressed in the <emph>Formula Consensus</emph> <foreign rend='italic'>Helvetica</foreign> of Heidegger of
Zürich, adopted in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1675 by most of the cantons. It was, like the
<emph>Formula Concordiæ</emph>, a manual of doctrine rather than a confession.
In opposition to Amyrault and De la Place, it set forth a strict theory
of predestination and original sin, and maintained with the Buxtorfs,
against Cappellus of Saumur, the inspiration of the Hebrew vowel
points.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_161_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Cocceian and Cartesian Controversies.</emph>&mdash;If not the founder,
certainly the most distinguished representative in the Netherlands of
that scholasticism which sought to expound and defend orthodoxy,
was <emph>Voetius</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1676, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1607 pastor in various
places, and from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1634 professor at Utrecht. A completely different
course was pursued by <emph>Cocceius</emph> of Bremen, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1669,
professor at Franeker in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1636, and at Leyden in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1650. The
famous Zürich theologian, Bullinger (§ 138, 7), had in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Compend.
Rel. Chr.</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1556, viewed the whole doctrine of saving truth from
the point of view of a covenant of grace between God and man; and
this idea was afterwards carried out by Olevianus of Heidelberg
(§ 144, 1) in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Substantia Fœderis</foreign>,</q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1585. This became
the favourite method of distribution of doctrine in the whole German
Reformed church. In the Dutch church it was regarded as quite
unobjectionable. In England it was adopted in the Westminster
Confession of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1648 (<ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>§ 155, 1</ref>), and in Switzerland in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1675, in
the <emph>Formula Consensus</emph>. Cocceius is therefore not the founder of the
federal theology. He simply gave it a new and independent development,
and freed it from the trammels of scholastic dogmatics. He
distinguished a twofold covenant of God with man: the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fœdus operum
s. naturæ</foreign> before, and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fœdus gratiæ</foreign> after the fall. He then subdivided
the covenant of grace into three economies: before the law
until Moses; under the law until Christ; and after the law in the
Christian church. The history of the kingdom of God in the
Christian era was arranged in seven periods, corresponding to the
seven apocalyptic epistles, trumpets, and seals. In his treatment of
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
his theme, he repudiated philosophy, scholasticism, and tradition, and
held simply by Scripture. He is thus the founder of a purely biblical
theology. He attached himself as closely as possible to the prevailing
predestinationist orthodoxy, but only externally. In his view the
sacred history in its various epochs adjusted itself to the needs of
human personality, and to the growing capacity for appropriating it.
Hence it was not the idea of election, but that of grace, that prevailed
in his system. Christ is the centre of all history, spiritual, ecclesiastical,
and civil; and so everything in Scripture, history, doctrine, and
prophecy, necessarily and immediately stands related to him. The
O.T. prophecies and types point to the Christ that was to come in the
flesh, and all history after Christ points to his second coming; and
O. and N.T. give an outline of ecclesiastical and civil history down
to the end of time. Thus typology formed the basis of the Cocceian
theology. In exegesis, however, Cocceius avoided all arbitrary allegorizing.
It was with him an axiom in hermeneutics, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Id significan
verba, quod significare possunt in integra oratione, sic ut omnino inter se
conveniant</foreign>. Yet his typology led him, and still more many of his
adherents, into fantastic exegetical errors in the prophetic treatment
of the seven apocalyptic periods.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_161_Para_5'/>
5. A controversy, occasioned by Cocceius' statement, in his commentary
on Hebrews in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1658, that the Sabbath, as enjoined by the
O.T. ceremonial law, was no longer binding, was stopped in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1659
by a State prohibition. Voetius had not taken part in it. But when
Cocceius, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1665, taught from Romans iii. 25, that believers under
the law had not full <q>ἄφεσις,</q> only a <q>πάρεσις,</q> he felt obliged to
enter the lists against this <q>Socinian</q> heresy. The controversy soon
spread to other doctrines of Cocceius and his followers, and soon the
whole populace seemed divided into Voetians and Cocceians (<ref target='Section_162_Para_5'>§ 162, 5</ref>).
The one hurled offensive epithets at the other. The Orange political
party sought and obtained the favour of the Voetians, as before they
had that of the Gomarists; while the liberal republican party coalesced
with the Cocceians. Philosophical questions next came to be
mixed up in the discussion. The philosophy of the French Catholic
<emph>Descartes</emph> (<ref target='Section_164_Para_1'>§ 164, 1</ref>), settled in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1629 in Amsterdam, had gained
ground in the Netherlands. It had indeed no connexion with
Christianity or church, and its theological friends wished only to
have it recognised as a formal branch of study. But its fundamental
principle, that all true knowledge starts from doubt, appeared to the
representatives of orthodoxy as threatening the church with serious
danger. Even in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1643 Voetius opposed it, and mainly in consequence
of his polemic, the States General, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1656, forbad it being
taught in the universities. Their common opposition to scholasticism,
however, brought Cocceians and Cartesians more closely to one
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
another. Theology now became influenced by Cartesianism. Roëll,
professor at Franeker and Utrecht, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1718, taught that
the divinity of the Scriptures must be proved to the reason, since the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>testimonium Spir. s. internum</foreign> is limited to those who already believe,
rejected the doctrine of the imputation of original sin, the doctrine
that death is for believers the punishment of sin, and the application
of the idea of eternal <q>generation</q> to the Logos, to whom the predicate
of sonship belongs only in regard to the decree of redemption and
incarnation. Another zealous Cartesian, Balth. Bekker, not only
repudiated the superstitions of the age about witchcraft (§ 117, 4),
but also denied the existence of the devil and demons. The Cocceians
were in no way responsible for such extravagances, but their opponents
sought to make them chargeable for these. The stadtholder,
William III., at last issued an order, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1694, which checked for a
time the violence of the strife.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_161_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Theological Literature.</emph>&mdash;Biblical oriental philology flourished in
the Reformed church of this age. <emph>Drusius</emph> of Franeker, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1616, was the greatest Old Testament exegete of his day. The two
<emph>Buxtorfs</emph> of Basel, the father died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1629, the son <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1664, the
greatest Christian rabbinical scholars, wrote Hebrew and Chaldee
grammars, lexicons, and concordances, and maintained the antiquity
and even inspiration of the Hebrew vowel points against Cappellus of
Saumur. <emph>Hottinger</emph> of Zürich, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1667, vied with both in
his knowledge of oriental literature and languages, and wrote extensively
on biblical philology, and besides found time to write a comprehensive
and learned church history. <emph>Cocceius</emph>, too, occupies a
respectable place among Hebrew lexicographers. In England, both
before and after the Restoration, scholarship was found, not among
the controversial Puritans, but among the Episcopal clergy. <emph>Brian
Walton</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1661, aided by the English scholars, issued an
edition of the <q>London Polyglott</q> in six vols., in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1657, which, in
completeness of material and apparatus, as well as in careful textual
criticism, leaves earlier editions far behind. <emph>Edm. Castellus</emph> of Cambridge
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1669 published his celebrated <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lexicon Heptaglottum</foreign>.</q>
The Elzevir printing-house at Amsterdam and Leyden, boldly assuming
the prerogatives of the whole body of theological scholars, issued a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>textus receptus</foreign> of the N.T. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1624. The best established exegetical
results of earlier times were collected by Pearson in his great compendium,
the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Critici Sacri</foreign>,</q> nine vols. fol., London, 1660; and Matthew
Pool in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Synopsis Criticorum</foreign>,</q> five vols. fol., London, 1669. Among
the exegetes of this time the brothers, J. Cappellus of Sedan, who died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1624, and Louis Cappellus II. of Saumur, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1658, were
distinguished for their linguistic knowledge and liberal criticism.
<emph>Pococke</emph> of Oxford and <emph>Lightfoot</emph> of Cambridge were specially eminent
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
orientalists. <emph>Cocceius</emph> wrote commentaries on almost all the books of
Scripture, and his scholar <emph>Vitringa</emph> of Franeker, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1716,
gained great reputation by his expositions of Isaiah and the Apocalypse.
Among the Arminians the famous statesman <emph>Grotius</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1645, was the greatest master of grammatico-historical exposition in
the century, and illustrated Scripture from classical literature and
philology. The Reformed church too gave brilliant contributions to
biblical archæology and history. <emph>John Selden</emph> wrote <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Syndriis
Vett. Heb.</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De diis Syris</foreign>,</q> etc. <emph>Goodwin</emph> wrote <q>Moses and Aaron.</q>
<emph>Ussher</emph> wrote <q><foreign rend='italic'>Annales V. et N.T.</foreign></q> <emph>Spencer</emph> wrote <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Legibus Heb.</foreign></q>
The Frenchman <emph>Bochart</emph>, in his <q><foreign rend='italic'>Hierozoicon</foreign></q> and <q><foreign rend='italic'>Phaleg</foreign>,</q> made
admirable contributions to the natural history and geography of the
Bible.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_161_Para_7'/>
7. Dogmatic theology was cultivated mainly in the Netherlands.
<emph>Maccovius</emph>, a Pole, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1644, a professor at Franeker, introduced
the scholastic method into Reformed dogmatics. The Synod of
Dort cleared him of the charge of heresy made against him by Amesius,
but condemned his method. Yet it soon came into very general use.
Its chief representatives were Maresius of Groningen, Voetius and
Mastricht of Utrecht, Hoornbeck of Leyden, and the German Wendelin,
rector of Zerbst. Among the Cocceians the most distinguished were
Heidanus of Leyden, Alting of Groningen, and, above all, Hermann
Witsius of Franeker, whose <q>Economy of the Covenants</q> is written
in a conciliatory spirit. The most distinguished Arminian dogmatist
after Episcopius was <emph>Phil. Limborch</emph> of Amsterdam, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1712,
in high repute also as an apologist, exegete, and historian. The
greatest dogmatist of the Anglican church was <emph>Pearson</emph>, who died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1686, author of <q>An Exposition of the Creed.</q> The Frenchman
<emph>Peyrerius</emph> obtained great notoriety from his statement, founded on
Romans v. 12, that Adam was merely the ancestor of the Jews (Gen. ii.
7), while the Gentiles were of pre-Adamite origin (Gen. i. 26), and also
by maintaining that the flood had been only partial. He gained
release from prison by joining the Catholic church and recanted, but
still held by his earlier views.&mdash;Ethics, consisting hitherto of little
more than an exposition of the decalogue, was raised by <emph>Amyrault</emph> into
an independent science. Amesius dealt with cases of conscience.
<emph>Grotius</emph>, in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Veritate Relig. Chr.</foreign></q> and <emph>Abbadie</emph>, French pastor at
Berlin, and afterwards in London, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1727, in his <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Vérité
de la Rel. Chrét.</foreign>,</q> distinguished themselves as apologists. <emph>Claude</emph> and
<emph>Jurieu</emph> gained high reputation as controversialists against Catholicism
and its persecution of the Huguenots.&mdash;The Reformed church also
in the interests of polemics pursued historical studies. Hottinger
of Zürich, Spanheim of Leyden, Sam. Basnage of Zütpfen, and Jac.
Basnage of the Hague, produced general church histories. Among the
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
numerous historical monographs the most important are <emph>Hospinian's</emph>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Templis</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Monachis</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Festis</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hist. Sacramentaria</foreign>,</q>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Historia Jesuitica</foreign></q>; <emph>Blondel's</emph> <q><foreign rend='italic'>Ps.-Isidorus</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>De la Primauté de
l'Egl.</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Question si une Femme a été Assisse au Siège Papal</foreign></q> (§ 82, 6),
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Apologia sent. Hieron. de Presbyt.</foreign></q> Also <emph>Daillé</emph> of Saumur on the non-genuineness
of the <q>Apostolic Constitutions</q> and the Ps.-Dionysian
writings, and his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Usu Patrum</foreign></q> in opposition to Cave's Catholicizing
over-estimation of the Fathers. We have also the English
scholar <emph>Ussher</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1656, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Brit. Ecclesiarum Antiquitates</foreign></q>;
H. Dodwell, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1711, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Diss. Cyprianicæ</foreign>,</q> etc.; Wm. Cave,
who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1713, <q>Hist. of App. and Fathers,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Scriptorum Ecclst.
Hist. Literaria</foreign>,</q> etc.&mdash;Special mention should be made of <emph>Eisenmenger</emph>,
professor of oriental languages at Heidelberg. In his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Entdecktes
Judenthum</foreign>,</q> two vols. quarto, moved by the over-bearing arrogance of
the Jews of his day, he made an immense collection of absurdities and
blasphemies of rabbinical theology from Jewish writings. At his own
expense he printed 2,000 copies; for these the Jews offered him 12,000
florins, but he demanded 30,000. They now persuaded the court at
Venice to confiscate them before a single copy was sold. Eisenmenger
died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1704, and his heirs vainly sought to have the copies of his
work given up to them. Even the appeal of Frederick I. of Prussia
was refused. Only when the king had resolved, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1711, at his
own expense to publish an edition from one copy that had escaped confiscation,
was the Frankfort edition at last given back.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_161_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>The Apocrypha Controversy (§ 136, 4).</emph>&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1520 Carlstadt raised
the question of the books found only in the LXX., and answered it in
the style of Jerome (§ 59, 1). Luther gave them in his translation as
an appendix to the O.T. with the title <q>Apocrypha, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Books, not
indeed of Holy Scripture, but useful and worthy to be read.</q> Reformed
confessions took up the same position. The Belgic Confession agreed
indeed that these books should be read in church, and proof passages
taken from them, in so far as they were in accord with the canonical
Scriptures. The Anglican Book of Common Prayer gives readings
from these books. On the other hand, although at the Synod of Dort
the proposal to remove at least the apocryphal books of Ezra or Esdras,
Tobit, Judith, Bel and the Dragon, was indeed rejected, it was ordered
that in future all apocryphal books should be printed in smaller type
than the canonical books, should be separately paged, with a special
title, and with a preface and marginal notes where necessary. Their
exclusion from all editions of the Bible was first insisted on by English
and Scotch Puritans. This example was followed by the French,
but not by the German, Swiss, and Dutch Reformed churches.&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_182_Para_4'>§ 182, 4</ref>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 162. The Religious Life.<note place='foot'>Barclay, <q>The Inner Life of the Religious Societies of the Commonwealth.</q>
Second ed. London, 1877. Dr. Stoughton's <q>History
of Religion in England from Opening of Long Parliament to End of
Eighteenth Century.</q> London.</note></head>

<p>
The religious life in the Reformed church is characterized
generally by harsh legalism, rigorous renunciation of the
world, and a thorough earnestness, coupled with decision and
energy of will, which nothing in the world can break or
bend. It is the spirit of Calvin which impresses on it this
character, and determines its doctrine. Only where Calvin's
influence was less potent, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> in the Lutheranized German
Reformed, the catholicized Anglican Episcopal Church, and
among the Cocceians, is this tendency less apparent or
altogether wanting. On the other hand, often carried to
the utmost extreme, it appears among the English Puritans
(§§ 143, 3; <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>) and the French Huguenots (<ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>§ 153, 4</ref>),
where it was fostered by persecution and oppression.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_162_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>England and Scotland.</emph>&mdash;During the period of the English Revolution
(§ 155, <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_155_Para_2'>2</ref>), after the overthrow of Episcopacy, Puritanism became
dominant; and the incongruous and contradictory elements already
existing within it assumed exaggerated proportions (§ 143, 3, 4), until
at last the opposing parties broke out into violent contentions with
one another. The ideal of Scottish and English <emph>Presbyterianism</emph> was
the setting up of the kingdom of Christ as a theocracy, in which
church and state were blended after the O.T. pattern. Hence all the
institutions of church and state were to be founded on Scripture
models, while all later developments were set aside as deteriorations
from that standard. The ecclesiastical side of this ideal was to be
realized by the establishment of a spiritual aristocracy represented in
presbyteries and synods, which, ruling the presbyteries through the
synods, and the congregations through the presbyteries, regarded itself
as called and under obligation to inspect and supervise all the details
of the private as well as public life of church members, and all this
too by Divine right. Regarding their system as alone having divine
institution, Presbyterians could not recognise any other religious or
ecclesiastical party, and must demand uniformity, not only in regard
to doctrine and creed, but also in regard to constitution, discipline,
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
and worship.<note place='foot'>See Macpherson, <q>Presbyterianism</q> (Edin., 1883), pp. 8-10, where
charges of intolerance such as those made against Presbyterianism in
the text are repudiated.</note>&mdash;On the other hand, <emph>Independent Congregationalism</emph>,
inasmuch as it made prominent the N.T. ideas of the priesthood of all
believers and spiritual freedom, demanded unlimited liberty to each
separate congregation, and unconditional equality for all individual
church members. It thus rejected the theocratic ideal of Presbyterianism,
strove after a purely democratic constitution, and recognised
toleration of all religious views as a fundamental principle of Christianity.
Every attempt to secure uniformity and stability of forms of
worship was regarded as a repressing of the Spirit of God operating
in the church, and so alongside of the public services private conventicles
abounded, in which believers sought to promote mutual
edification. But soon amid the upheavals of this agitated period a
fanatical spirit spread among the various sects of the Independents.
The persecutions under Elizabeth and the Stuarts had awakened a
longing for the return of the Lord, and the irresistible advance of
Cromwell's army, composed mostly of Independents, made it appear as
if the millennium was close at hand. Thus chiliasm came to be a
fundamental principle of Independency, and soon too prophecy made
its appearance to interpret and prepare the way for that which was
coming. From the <emph>Believers</emph> of the old Dutch times we now come to
the <emph>Saints</emph> of the early Cromwell period. These regarded themselves
as called, in consequence of their being inspired by God's Spirit, to
form the <q>kingdom of the saints</q> on earth promised in the last
days, and hence also, from Daniel ii. and vii., they were called Fifth
Monarchy Men. The so called Short Parliament of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1653, in
which these Saints were in a majority, had already laid the first stones
of this structure by introducing civil marriage, with the strict enforcement,
however, of Matthew v. 32, as well as by the abolition of all
rights of patronage and all sorts of ecclesiastical taxes, when Cromwell
dissolved it. The Saints had not and would not have any fixed, formulated
theological system. They had, however, a most lively interest in
doctrine, and produced a great diversity of Scripture expositions and
dogmatic views, so that their deadly foes, the Presbyterians, could
hurl against them old and new heretical designations by the hundred.
The fundamental doctrine of predestination, common to all Puritans,
was, even with them, for the most part, a presupposition of all
theological speculation.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_162_Para_2'/>
2. At the same time with the <emph>Saints</emph> there appeared among the
Independents the <emph>Levellers</emph>, political and social revolutionists, rather
than an ecclesiastical and religious sect. They were unjustly charged
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
with claiming an equal distribution of goods. Over against the
absolutist theories of the Stuarts, all the Independents maintained
that the king, like all other civil magistrates, is answerable at all
times and in all circumstances to the people, to whom all sovereignty
originally and inalienably belongs. This principle was taken by the
Levellers as the starting-point of their reforms. As their first regulative
principle in reconstructing the commonwealth and determining
the position of the church therein they did not take the theocratic
constitution of the O.T., as the Presbyterians did, nor the biblical
revelation of the N.T., as the moderate Independents did, nor even the
modern professed prophecy of the <q>Saints,</q> but the law of nature as
the basis of all revelation, and already grounded in creation, with the
sovereignty of the people as its ultimate foundation. While the rest
of the Independents held by the idea of a Christian state, and only
claimed that all Christian denominations, with the exception of the
Catholics (<ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>§ 153, 6</ref>), should enjoy all political rights, the Levellers
demanded complete separation of church and state. This therefore
implied, on the one hand, the non-religiousness of the state, and, on
the other, again with the exception of Catholics, the absolute freedom,
independence, and equality of all religious parties, even non-Christian
sects and atheists. Yet all the while the Levellers themselves were
earnestly and warmly attached to Christian truth as held by the other
Independents.&mdash;Roger Williams (<ref target='Section_163_Para_3'>§ 163, 3</ref>), a Baptist minister, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1631 transplanted the first seeds of Levellerism from England to
North America, and by his writings helped again to spread those
views in England. When he returned home in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1651 he found the
sect already flourishing. The ablest leader of the English Levellers
was John Lilburn. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1638, when scarcely twenty years old, he
was flogged and sentenced to imprisonment for life, because he had
printed Puritan writings in Holland and had them circulated in
England. Released on the outbreak of the Revolution, he joined the
Parliamentary army, was taken prisoner by the Royalists and
sentenced to death, but escaped by flight. He was again imprisoned
for writing libels on the House of Lords. Set free by the Rump
Parliament, he became colonel in Cromwell's army, but was banished
the country when it was found that the spread of radicalism endangered
discipline. Till the dissolution of the Short Parliament
his followers were in thorough sympathy with the Saints. Afterwards
their ways went more and more apart; the Saints drifted into
Quakerism (<ref target='Section_163_Para_4'>§ 163, 4</ref>), while the Levellers degenerated into deism
(<ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>§ 164, 3</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_162_Para_3'/>
3. Out of the religious commotion prevailing in England before,
during, and after the Revolution there sprang up a voluminous
<emph>devotional literature</emph>, intended to give guidance and directions for holy
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
living. Its influence was felt in foreign lands, especially in the Reformed
churches of the continent, and even German Lutheran Pietism
was not unaffected by it (<ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>§ 159, 3</ref>). That this movement was not confined
to the Puritans, among whom it had its origin, is seen from the
fact that during the seventeenth century many such treatises were
issued from the University Press of Cambridge. <emph>Lewis Bayly</emph>, Bishop of
Bangor <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1616-1632, wrote one of the most popular books of this kind,
<q>The Practice of Piety,</q> which was in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1635 in its thirty-second and
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1741 in its fifty-first edition, and was also widely circulated in
Dutch, French, German, Hungarian, and Polish translations.&mdash;Out of
the vast number of important personages of the Revolution period we
name the following three: (1) In <emph>John Milton</emph>, the highly gifted poet
as well as eloquent and powerful politician, born <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1608, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1674, we find, on the basis of a liberal classical training received in
youth, all the motive powers of Independency, from the original
Puritan zeal for the faith and Reformation to the politico-social
radicalism of the Levellers, combined in full and vigorous operation.
From Italy, the beloved land of classical science and artistic culture,
he was called back to England in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1640 at the first outburst of
freedom-loving enthusiasm (<ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>§ 155, 1</ref>), and made the thunder of his
controversial treatises ring over the battlefield of parties. He fought
against the narrowness of Presbyterian control of conscience not less
energetically than against the hierarchism of the Episcopal church;
vindicates the permissibility of divorce (in view, no doubt, of his own
first unhappy marriage); advanced in his <q><foreign rend='italic'>Areopagitica</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1644
a plea for the unrestricted liberty of the press; pulverized in his
<q><foreign rend='italic'>Iconoclastes</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1649 the Εἰκὼν βασιλικηή, ascribed to Charles I.;
in several tracts, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Defensio pro Populo Anglicano</foreign></q> etc., justified the
execution of the king against Salmasius's <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Defensio Regia pro Carolo
I.</foreign></q>; and, even after he had in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1652 become incurably blind, he
continued unweariedly his polemics till silenced by the Restoration.
The <q><foreign rend='italic'>Iconoclastes</foreign></q> and <q><foreign rend='italic'>Defensio</foreign></q> were burned by the hangman,
but he himself was left unmolested. He now devoted himself to
poetry. <q>Paradise Lost</q> appeared in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1665, and <q>Paradise
Regained</q> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1671. To this period, when he had probably turned
his back on all existing religious parties, belongs the composition of
his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De doctrina Christiana</foreign>,</q> a first attempt at a purely biblical
theology, Arian in its Christology and Arminian in its soteriology.<note place='foot'>Masson, <q>Life of John Milton.</q> 4 vols. London, 1859. Pattison,
<q>Milton</q> in <q>English Men of Letters</q> series. London, 1880.</note>&mdash;(2)
<emph>Richard Baxter</emph>, born <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1615, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1691, was quite a different
sort of man, and showed throughout a decidedly ironical tendency.
At once attracted and repelled by the Independent movement in
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
Cromwell's army, he joined the force in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645 as military chaplain,
hoping to moderate, if not to check, their extravagances. A severe
illness obliged him to withdraw in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1647. After his recovery he
returned to his former post as assistant-minister at Kidderminster in
Worcestershire, and there remained till driven out by the Act of
Uniformity of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1662 (<ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>§ 155, 3</ref>). Those fourteen years formed the
period of his most successful labours. He then composed most of his
numerous devotional works, three of which, <q>The Saint's Everlasting
Rest,</q> <q>The Reformed Pastor,</q> <q>A Call to the Unconverted,</q> are
still widely read in the original and in translations. At first he
hoped much from the Restoration; but when, on conscientious grounds,
he refused a bishopric, he met only with persecution, ill treatment,
and imprisonment. Through William's Act of Toleration of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1689, he was allowed to pass the last year of his life in London. On
the doctrine of predestination he took the moderate position of Amyrault
(<ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>§ 161, 3</ref>). His ideal church constitution was a blending of
Presbyterianism and Episcopacy, by restoring the original episcopal
constitution of the second century, when even the smaller churches
had each its own bishop with a presbytery by his side.<note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Relquiæ Baxterianæ</foreign>: Baxter's Narrative of most Memorable
Passages in his own Life.</q> London, 1696. Orme, <q>Life and Times of
Richard Baxter, with Critical Examination of his Writings.</q> London,
1830. Stalker, <q>Baxter</q> in <q>Evangelical Succession Lectures.</q>
Second series. Edinburgh, 1883.</note>&mdash;(3) <emph>John
Bunyan</emph>, born <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1628, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1688, was in his youth a tinker or
brazier, and as such seems to have led a rough, wild life. On the
outbreak of the Civil War in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1642, he was drafted into the
Parliamentary army.<note place='foot'>Froude disputes this, and says, p. 12, that probably he was on the
side of the Royalists. Brown has shown it to be almost certain
that in 1644, not 1642, Bunyan, then in his sixteenth year, joined the
Parliamentary forces. See Brown's <q>Life,</q> pp. 42-52.</note> At the close of the war he married a poor girl
from a Puritan family, whose only marriage portion consisted in two
Puritan books of devotion. It was now that the birthday of a new
spiritual life began to dawn in him. He joined the Baptist Independents,
the most zealous of the Saints of that time, was baptized by
them in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1655, and travelled the country as a preacher, attracting
thousands around him everywhere by his glorious eloquence. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1660 he was thrown into prison, from which he was released
by the Indulgence of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1672 (<ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>§ 155, 3</ref>). He now settled in
Bedford, and from this time till his death, amid persecution and
oppression, continued his itinerant preaching with ever-increasing
zeal and success. <q>The Pilgrim's Progress</q> was written by him in
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
prison. It is an allegory of the freshest and most lively form, worthy
to rank alongside the <q>Imitation of Christ</q> (§ 114, 7). In it the
fanatical endeavour of the Saints to rear a millennial kingdom on earth
is transfigured into a struggle overcoming all hindrances to secure
an entrance into the heavenly Zion above. It has passed through
numberless editions, and has been translated into almost all known
languages.<note place='foot'>Brown, <q>Life of Bunyan.</q> London, 1885. Autobiography in
<q>Grace Abounding,</q> 1622. Southey, <q>Life of John Bunyan.</q>
London, 1830. Macaulay, <q>Essay on Bunyan,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh
Review</hi>, 1830. Froude, <q>Bunyan,</q> in <q>English Men of Letters.</q>
London, 1880. Nicoll, <q>Bunyan,</q> in <q>Evangelical Succession
Lectures.</q> Third series. Edinburgh, 1883.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_162_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Netherlands.</emph>&mdash;From England the Reformed Pietism was
transplanted to the Netherlands, where <emph>William Teellinck</emph> may be
regarded as its founder. After finishing his legal studies he resided
for a while in England, where he made the acquaintance of the
Puritans and their writings, and was deeply impressed with their
earnest and pious family life. He then went to Leyden to study
theology, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1606 began a ministry that soon bore fruit. He
was specially blessed at Middelburg in Zealand, where he died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1629. His writings, larger and smaller, more than a hundred in
number, in which a peculiar sweetness of mystical love for the
Redeemer is combined with stern Calvinistic views, after the style of
St. Bernard, were circulated widely in numerous editions, eagerly
read in many lands, and for fully a century exerted a powerful
influence throughout the whole Reformed church. Teellinck in no
particular departed from the prevailing orthodoxy, but unwittingly
toned down its harshness in his tracts, and with the gentleness characteristic
of him counselled brotherly forbearance amid the bitterness
of the Arminian controversy. In spite of much hostility, which his
best efforts could not prevent, many university theologians stood by
his side as warm admirers of his writings. It will not be wondered
at that among these was the pious Amesius of Franeker (<ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>§ 161, 7</ref>),
the scholar of the able Perkins (§ 143, 5); but it is more surprising
to find here the powerful champion of scholastic orthodoxy,
Voetius of Utrecht, and his vigorous partisan, Hoornbeeck of Leyden.
<emph>Voetius</emph> especially, who even in his preacademic career as a pastor had
pursued a peculiarly exemplary and godly life, styled Teellinck the
Reformed Thomas à Kempis, and owned his deep indebtedness to his
devout writings. He opened his academic course in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1634 with an
introductory discourse, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Pietate cum Scientia conjungenda</foreign>,</q> and
year after year gave lectures on ascetical theology, out of which
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
grew his treatise published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1664, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Τὰ Ἀσκητικὰ s. Exercita
Pietatis in usum Juventutis Acad.</foreign>,</q> which is a complete exposition of
evangelical practical divinity in a thoroughly scholastic form.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_162_Para_5'/>
5. During the controversy in the Dutch Reformed Church between
<emph>Voetians and Cocceians</emph>, beginning in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1658, the former favoured
the pietistic movement. In the German Pietist controversy the
Cocceians were with the Pietists in their biblical orthodoxy joined
with confessional indifferentism, but with the orthodox in their
liberality and breadth on matters of life and conduct. The earnest,
practical piety of the Voetians, again, made them sympathise with
the Lutheran Pietists, and their zeal for pure doctrine and the Church
confession brought them into relation with the orthodox Lutherans.
As discord between the theologians arose over the obligation of the
Sabbath law, so the difference among the people arose out of the
question of Sabbath observance. The Voetians maintained that the
decalogue prohibition of any form of work on Sabbath was still
fully binding, while the Cocceians, on the ground of Mark ii. 27,
Galatians iv. 9, Colossians ii. 16, etc., denied its continued obligation,
their wives often, to the annoyance of the Voetians, sitting in the
windows after Divine service with their knitting or sewing. But the
opposition did not stop there; it spread into all departments of life.
The Voetians set great value upon fasting and private meditation,
avoided all public games and plays, dressed plainly, and observed a
simple, pious mode of life; their pastors wore a clerical costume, etc.
The Cocceians, again, fell in with the customs of the time, mingled
freely in the mirth and pastimes of the people, went to public festivals
and entertainments, their women dressed in elegant, stylish
attire, their pastors were not bound by hard and fast symbols, but
had full Scripture freedom, etc.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_169_Para_2'>§ 169, 2</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_162_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>France, Germany, and Switzerland.</emph>&mdash;The Reformed church of
<emph>France</emph> has gained imperishable renown as a martyr-church. Fanatical
excesses, however, appeared among the prophets of the Cevennes
(<ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>§ 153, 4</ref>), the fruits of which continued down into the eighteenth century,
and appeared now and again in England, Holland, and Germany
(§ 160, <ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_160_Para_7'>7</ref>).&mdash;In <emph>Germany</emph> the Reformed church, standing side by side
with the numerically far larger Lutheran church, had much of the
sternness and severity that characterized the Romanic-Calvinistic party
in doctrine, worship, and life greatly modified; but where the Reformed
element was predominant, as in the Lower Rhine, it was correspondingly
affected by a contrary influence. The Reformed church in
Germany in its service of praise kept to the psalms of Marot and
Lobwasser (§ 143, 2). Maurice of Hesse published Lobwasser's in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1612, accompanied by some new bright melodies, for the use of
the churches in the land. Lutheran hymns, however, gradually
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
found their way into the Reformed church, which also produced two
gifted poets of its own. <emph>Louisa Henrietta</emph>, Princess of Orange, wife of
the great elector, and Paul Gerhardt's sovereign, wrote <q>Jesus my
Redeemer lives</q>; and <emph>Joachim Neander</emph>, pastor in Bremen, wrote, <q>Thou
most Highest! Guardian of mankind,</q> <q>To heaven and earth and
sea and air,</q> <q>Here behold me, as I cast me.</q>&mdash;In German <emph>Switzerland</emph>
the noble <emph>Breitinger</emph> of Zürich, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1645, the greatest successor
of Zwingli and Bullinger, wrought successfully during a forty
years' ministry, and did much to revive and quicken the church life.
That the spirit of Calvin and Beza still breathed in the church of
Geneva is proved by the reception given there to such men as Andreä
(<ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>§ 160, 1</ref>), Labadie (<ref target='Section_163_Para_7'>§ 163, 7</ref>), and Spener (<ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>§ 159, 3</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_162_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Foreign Missions.</emph>&mdash;From two sides the Reformed church had
outlets for its Christian love in the work of foreign missions; on the
one side by the cession of the Portuguese East Indian colonies to the
Netherlands in the beginning of the seventeenth century, and on the
other side by the continuous formation of English colonies in North
America throughout the whole century. In regard to missionary
effort, the Dutch government followed in the footsteps of her Portuguese
predecessors. She insisted that all natives, before getting a situation,
should be baptized and have signed the Belgic Confession, and many
who fulfilled these conditions remained as they had been before. But
the English Puritans settled in America showed a zeal for the conversion
of the Indians more worthy of the Protestant name. John
Eliot, who is rightly styled the apostle of the Indians, devoted himself
with unwearied and self-denying love for half a century to this
task. He translated the Bible into their language, and founded
seventeen Indian stations, of which during his lifetime ten were
destroyed in a bloody war. Eliot's work was taken up by the Mayhew
family, who for five generations wrought among the Indians.
The last of the noble band, Zacharias Mayhew, died on the mission
field in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1803, in his 87th year.<note place='foot'><q>Life of John Eliot, Apostle of the Indians.</q> By John Wilson,
afterwards of Bombay. Edin., 1828.</note>&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>§ 172, 5</ref>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Anti- and Extra-Ecclesiastical Parties.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 163. Sects and Fanatics.</head>

<p>
Socinianism during the first decades of the century made
extraordinary progress in Poland, but then collapsed under
the persecution of the Jesuits. Related to the continental
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
Anabaptists were the English Baptists, who rejected infant
baptism; while the Quakers, who adopted the old fanatical
theory of an inner light, set baptism and the Lord's supper
entirely aside. In the sect of the Labadists we find a
blending of Catholic quietist mysticism and Calvinistic
Augustinianism. Besides those regular sects, there were
various individual enthusiasts and separatists. These were
most rife in the Netherlands, where the free civil constitution
afforded a place of refuge for all exiles on account of
their faith. Here only was the press free enough to serve
as a thoroughgoing propaganda of mysticism and theosophy.
Finally the Russian sects, hitherto little studied, call for
special attention.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Socinians (§ 148, 4).</emph>&mdash;The most important of the Socinian
congregations in <emph>Poland</emph>, for the most part small and composed almost
exclusively of the nobility, was that at Racau in the Sendomir Palatinate.
Founded in 1569, this city, since 1600 under James Sieninski,
son of the founder, recognised Socinianism as the established religion;
and an academy was formed there which soon occupied a distinguished
position, and gave such reputation to the place that it could
be spoken of as <q>the Sarmatian Athens.</q> But the congregation at
Lublin, next in importance to that of Racau, was destroyed as early
as 1627 by the mob under fanatical excitement caused by the Jesuits.
The same disaster befell Racau itself eleven years later. A couple
of idle schoolboys had thrown stones at a wooden crucifix standing
before the city gate, and had been for this severely punished by their
parents, and turned out of school. The Catholics, however, made a
complaint before the senate, where the Jesuits secured a sentence that
the school should be destroyed, the church taken from <q>the Arians,</q>
the printing press closed, but the ministers and teachers outlawed
and branded with infamy. And the Jesuits did not rest until the
Reichstag at Warsaw in 1658 issued decrees of banishment against
<q>all Arians,</q> and forbad the profession of <q>Arianism</q> under pain
of death.&mdash;The Davidist non-adoration party of <emph>Transylvanian</emph> Unitarians
(§ 148, 3) was finally overcome, and the endeavours after
conformity with the Polish Socinians prevailed at the Diet of Deesch
in 1638, where all Unitarian communities engaged to offer worship
to Christ, and to accept the baptismal formula of Matthew xxviii. 19.
And under the standard of this so called <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Complanatio Deesiana</foreign> 106
Unitarian congregations, with a membership of 60,000 souls, exist in
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
Transylvania to this day.&mdash;In <emph>Germany</emph> Socinianism had, even in the
beginning of the century, a secret nursery in the University of Altdorf,
belonging to the territory of the imperial city of Nuremberg. Soner,
professor of medicine, had been won over to this creed by Socinians
residing at Leyden, where he had studied in 1597, 1598, and now used
his official position at Altdorf for, not only instilling his Unitarian
doctrines by means of private philosophical conversations into the
minds of his numerous students, who flocked to him from Poland,
Transylvania, and Hungary, but also for securing the adhesion of
several German students. Only after his death in 1612 did the
Nuremberg council come to know about this propaganda. A strict
investigation was then made, all Poles were expelled, and all the
Socinian writings that could be discovered were burned.&mdash;The later
Polish Exultants sought and found refuge in Germany, especially in
Silesia, Prussia, and Brandenburg, as well as in the Reformed Palatinate,
and also founded some small Unitarian congregations, which,
however, after maintaining for a while a miserable existence, gradually
passed out of view. They had greater success and spread more
widely in the <emph>Netherlands</emph>, till the states-general of 1653, in consequence
of repeated synodal protests, and on the ground of an opinion
given by the University of Leyden, issued a strict edict against the
Unitarians, who now gradually passed over to the ranks of the
Remonstrants (<ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>§ 161, 2</ref>) and the Collegiants. Also in <emph>England</emph>, since
the time of Henry VIII., antitrinitarian confessors and martyrs were
to be found. Even in 1611, under James I., three of them had been
consigned to the flames. The Polish Socinians took occasion from this
to send the king a Racovian Catechism; but in 1614 it was, by order
of parliament, burned by the hands of the hangman. The Socinians
were also excluded from the benefit of the Act of Toleration of 1689,
which was granted to all other dissenters (<ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>§ 155, 3</ref>). The progress of
deism, however, among the upper classes (§§ <ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>164, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>) did much
to prevent the extreme penal laws being carried into execution.&mdash;The
following are the most distinguished among the numerous learned
theologians of the Augustan age of Socinian scholarship, who contributed
to the extending, establishing, and vindicating of the system of
their church by exegetical, dogmatic, and polemical writings: John
Crell, died 1631; Jonas Schlichting, died 1661; Von Wolzogen, died
1661; and Andr. Wissowatius, a grandson of Faustus Socinus, died
1678; and with these must also be ranked the historian of Polish
Socinianism, Stanislaus Lubienicki, died 1675, whose <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hist. Reformat.
Polonicæ</foreign>,</q> etc., was published at Amsterdam in 1685.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Baptists of the Continent.</emph>&mdash;(1) <emph>The Dutch Baptists</emph> (§ 147, 2).
Even during Menno's lifetime the Mennonites had split into the <emph>Coarse</emph>
and the <emph>Fine</emph>. The <emph>Coarse</emph>, who had abandoned much of the primitive
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
severity of the sect, and were by far the most numerous, were again
divided during the Arminian controversy into Remonstrants and Predestinationists.
The former, from their leader, were called Galenists,
and from having a lamb as the symbol of their Church, Lambists.
The latter were called Apostoolers from their leader, and Sunists
because their churches had the figure of the sun as a symbol. The
Lambists, who acknowledged no confession of faith, were most numerous.
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1800, however, a union of the two parties was effected,
the Sunists adopting the doctrinal position of the Lambists.&mdash;During
the time when Arminian pastors were banished from the Netherlands,
three brothers Van der Kodde founded a sect of <emph>Collegiants</emph>, which
repudiated the clerical office, assigned preaching and dispensation of
sacraments to laymen, and baptized only adults by immersion. Their
place of baptism was Rhynsburg on the Rhine, and hence they were
called Rhynsburgers. Their other name was given them from
their assemblies, which they styled <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>collegia</foreign>.&mdash;(2) <emph>The Moravian Baptists</emph>
(§ 147, 3). The Thirty Years' War ruined the flourishing Baptist
congregations in Moravia, and the reaction against all non-Catholics
that followed the battle of the White Mountain near Prague, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1620, told sorely against them. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1622 a decree for their banishment
was issued, and these quiet, inoffensive men were again homeless
fugitives. Remnants of them fled into Hungary and Transylvania,
only to meet new persecutions there. A letter of protection from
Leopold I., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1659, secured them the right of settling in three
counties around Pressburg. But soon these rigorous persecutions
broke out afresh; they were beset by Jesuits seeking to convert them,
and when this failed they were driven out or annihilated. At last,
by <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1757-1762, they were completely broken up, and most of them
had joined the Roman Catholic church. A few families preserved
their faith by flight into South Russia, where they settled in Wirschenka.
When the Toleration Edict of Joseph II., of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1781,
secured religious freedom to Protestants in Austria, several returned
again to the faith of their fathers, in the hope that the toleration
would be extended to them; but they were bitterly disappointed.
They now betook themselves to Russia, and together with their
brethren already there, settled in the Crimea, where they still constitute
the colony of Hutersthal.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The English Baptists.</emph>&mdash;The notion that infant baptism is objectionable
also found favour among the English Independents. Owing
to the slight importance attached to the sacraments generally, and
more particularly to baptism, in the Reformed church, especially
among the Independents, the supporters of the practice of the
church in regard to baptism to a large extent occupied common
ground with its opponents. The separation took place only after the
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
rise of the fanatical prophetic sects (<ref target='Section_161_Para_1'>§ 161, 1</ref>). We must, however,
distinguish from the continental Anabaptists the English Baptists,
who enjoyed the benefit of the Toleration Act of William III., of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1689, along with the other dissenters, by maintaining their Independent-Congregationalist
constitution (<ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>§ 155, 3</ref>). In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1691, over the
Arminian question, they split up into Particular and General, or
Regular and Free Will, Baptists. The former, by far the more
numerous, held by the Calvinistic doctrine of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gratia particularis</foreign>,
while the latter rejected it. The Seventh-Day Baptists, who observed
the seventh instead of the first day of the week, were founded by
Bampfield in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1665.<note place='foot'>Crosby, <q>History of the English Baptists.</q> 4 vols. London, 1728.
Ivimey, <q>History of the English Baptists from 1688-1760.</q> 2 vols.
London, 1830. Cramp, <q>History of the Baptists to end of 18th Century.</q>
3 vols. London, 1872.</note>&mdash;From England the Baptists spread to North
America, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1630, where Roger Williams (<ref target='Section_162_Para_2'>§ 162, 2</ref>), one of their
first leaders, founded the little state of Rhode Island, and organized it
on thoroughly Baptist-Independent principles.<note place='foot'>Backus, <q>History of the English-American Baptists.</q> 2 vols.
Boston, 1777. Cox and Hoby, <q>The Baptists in America.</q> New
York, 1836. Hague, <q>The Baptists Transplanted,</q> etc. New York,
1846.</note>&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_170_Para_6'>§ 170, 6</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Quakers.</emph>&mdash;<emph>George Fox</emph>, born <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1624, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1691, was son of
a poor Presbyterian weaver in Drayton, Leicestershire. After scant
schooling he went to learn shoemaking at Nottingham, but in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1643
abandoned the trade. Harassed by spiritual conflicts, he wandered
about seeking peace for his soul. Upon hearing an Independent preach
on 2 Peter i. 19, he was moved loudly to contradict the preacher.
<q>What we have to do with,</q> he said, <q>is not the word, but the
Spirit by which those men of God spake and wrote.</q> He was
seized as a disturber of public worship, but was soon after released.
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1649 he travelled the country preaching and teaching, addressing
every man as <q>thou,</q> raising his hat to none, greeting none,
attracting thousands by his preaching, often imprisoned, flogged,
tortured, hunted like a wild beast. The core of his preaching was,
not Scripture, but the Spirit, not Christ without but Christ within, not
outward worship, not churches, <q>steeple-houses,</q> and bells, not doctrines
and sacraments, but only the inner light, which is kindled by
God in the conscience of every man, renewed and quickened by the
Spirit of Christ, which suddenly lays hold upon it. The number of
his followers increased from day to day. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1652 he found, along
with his friends, a kindly shelter in the house of Thomas Fell, of
Smarthmore near Preston, and in his wife Margaret a motherly
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
counsellor, who devoted her whole life to the cause. They called
themselves <q>The Society of Friends.</q> The name Quaker was given
as a term of reproach by a violent judge, whom Fox bad <q>quake
before the word of God.</q> After the overthrow of the hopes of the
Saints through the dissolution of the Short Parliament and Cromwell's
apostasy (<ref target='Section_155_Para_2'>§ 155, 2</ref>), many of them joined the Quakers, and led
them into revolutionary and fanatical excesses. Confined hitherto to
the northern counties, they now spread in London and Bristol, and
over all the south of England. In January, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1655, they held a fortnight's
general meeting at Swannington, in Leicestershire. Crowds
of apostles went over into Ireland, to North America and the West
Indies, to Holland, Germany, France, and Italy, and even to Constantinople.
They did not meet with great success. In Italy they
encountered the Inquisition, and in North America the severest penal
laws were passed against them. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1656 James Naylor, one of
their most famous leaders, celebrated at Bristol the second coming of
Christ <q>in the Spirit,</q> by enacting the scene of Christ's triumphal
entry into Jerusalem. But the king of the new Israel was scourged,
branded on the forehead with the letter B as a blasphemer, had his
tongue pierced with a redhot iron, and was then cast into prison.
Many absurd extravagances of this kind, which drew down upon
them frequent persecutions, as well as the failure of their foreign
missionary enterprises, brought most of the Quakers to adopt more
sober views. The great mother Quakeress, Margaret Fell, exercised a
powerful influence in this direction. George Fox, too, out of whose
hands the movement had for a long time gone, now lent his aid.
Naylor himself, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1659, issued a recantation, addressed <q>to all the
people of the Lord,</q> in which he made the confession, <q>My judgment
was turned away, and I was a captive under the power of darkness.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_5'/>
5. The movement of Quakerism in the direction of sobriety and
common sense was carried out to its fullest extent during the Stuart
Restoration, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1660-1688. Abandoning their revolutionary tendencies
through dislike to Cromwell's violence, and giving up most of their
fanatical extravagances, the Quakers became models of quiet, orderly
living. Robert Barclay, by his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Catechesis et Fidei Confessio</foreign>,</q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1673, gave a sort of symbolic expression to their belief, and vindicated
his doctrinal positions in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Theologiæ vere Christianæ Apologia</foreign></q> of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1676. During this period many of them laid down their lives for
their faith. On the other side of the sea they formed powerful settlements,
distinguished for religious toleration and brotherly love. The
chief promoter of this new departure was <emph>William Penn</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1644-1718,
son of an English admiral, who, while a student at Oxford,
was impressed by a Quaker's preaching, and led to attend the prayer
and fellowship meetings of the Friends. In order to break his connexion
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
with this party, his father sent him, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1661, to travel in
France and Italy. The frivolity of the French court failed to attract
him, but for a long time he was spellbound by Amyrault's theological
lectures at Saumur. On his return home, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1664, he seemed to
have completely come back to a worldly life, when once again he was
arrested by a Quaker's preaching. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1668 he formally joined
the society. For a controversial tract, <emph>The Sandy Foundation Shaken</emph>,
he was sent for six months to the Tower, where he composed the
famous tract, <emph>No Cross, no Crown</emph>, and a treatise in his own vindication,
<q>Innocency with her Open Face.</q> His father, who, shortly before
his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1670, was reconciled to his son, left him a yearly
income of £1,500, with a claim on Government for £16,000. In spite
of continued persecution and oppression he continued unweariedly to
promote the cause of Quakerism by speech and pen. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1677, in
company with Fox and Barclay, he made a tour through Holland and
Germany. In both countries he formed many friendships, but did
not succeed in establishing any societies. His hopes now turned to
North America, where Fox had already wrought with success during
the times of sorest persecution, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1671, 1672, In lieu of his father's
claim, he obtained from Government a large tract of land on the
Delaware, with the right of colonizing and organizing it under
English suzerainty. Twice he went out for this purpose himself, in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1682 and 1699, and formed the Quaker state of Pennsylvania,
with Philadelphia as its capital. The first principle of its constitution
was universal religious toleration, even to Catholics.<note place='foot'>Of special importance for the early history of the Quakers are,
<q>Letters of Early Friends,</q> edited by Robert Barclay, a descendant of
the Quaker apostle. London, 1841. <q>Fox's Journal; or, Historical
Accounts of his Life, Travels, and Sufferings.</q> London, 1694. Penn,
<q>Summary of History, Doctrines, and Discipline of Friends.</q> London,
1692. Tallack, <q>George Fox; the Quakers and the Early Baptists.</q>
London, 1868. Bickley, <q>George Fox and the Early Quakers.</q> London,
1884. Stoughton, <q>W. Penn, Founder of Pennsylvania.</q> London,
1883.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The Quaker Constitution</emph>, as fixed in Penn's time, was strictly democratic
and congregationalist, with complete exclusion of a clerical
order. At their services any man or woman, if moved by the Spirit,
might pray, teach, or exhort, or if no one felt so impelled they would
sit on in silence. Their meeting-houses had not the form or fittings
of churches, their devotional services had neither singing nor
music. They repudiated water baptism, alike of infants and adults,
and recognised only baptism of the Spirit. The Lord's supper, as a
symbolical memorial, is no more needed by those who are born again.
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
Monthly gatherings of all independent members, quarterly meetings
of deputies of a circuit, and a yearly synod of representatives of all
the circuits, administered or drew up the regulations for the several
societies. <emph>The Doctrinal Belief of the Quakers</emph> is completely dominated
by its central dogma of the <q>inner light,</q> which is identified with
reason and conscience as the common heritage of mankind. Darkened
and weakened by the fall, it is requickened in us by the Spirit of the
glorified Christ, and possesses us as an inner spiritual Christ, an
inner Word of God. The Bible is recognised as the outer word of
God, but is useful only as a means of arousing the inner word. The
Calvinistic doctrine of election is decidedly rejected, and also that of
vicarious satisfaction. But also the doctrines of the fall, original sin,
justification by faith, as well as that of the Trinity, are very much
set aside in favour of an indefinite subjective theology of feeling.
The operation of the Holy Spirit in man's redemption and salvation
outside of Christendom is frankly admitted. On the other hand, the
ethical-practical element, as shown in works of benevolence, in the
battle for religious freedom, for the abolition of slavery, etc., is
brought to the front. In regard to <emph>life and manners</emph>, the Quakers
have distinguished themselves in all domestic, civil, industrial, and
mercantile movements by quiet, peaceful industry, strict integrity,
and simple habits, so that not only did they amass great wealth,
but gained the confidence and respect of those around. They refused
to take oaths or to serve as soldiers, or to engage in sports, or to
indulge in any kind of luxury. In social intercourse they declined
to acknowledge any titles of rank, would not bow or raise the hat to
any, but addressed all by the simple <q>thou.</q> Their men wore broad-brimmed
hats, a plain, simple coat, without collar or buttons, fastened
by hooks. Their women wore a simple gray silk dress, with like
coloured bonnet, without ribbon, flower, or feathers, and a plain
shawl. Wearing mourning dress was regarded as a heathenish custom.<note place='foot'>Sewel, <q>History of the Quakers.</q> 2 vols. London, 1834. Cunningham,
<q>The Quakers, from their Origin in 1624 to the Present
Time.</q> London, 1868. Barclay, <q>Apology for the True Christian
Divinity: a Vindication of Quakerism.</q> 4th ed. London, 1701. Clarkson,
<q>A Portraiture of Quakerism.</q> 3 vols. London, 1806. Rowntree,
<q>Quakerism, Past and Present.</q> London, 1839.</note>&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_211_Para_3'>§ 211, 3</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Labadie and the Labadists.</emph>&mdash;Jean de Labadie, the scion of an
ancient noble family, born <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1610, was educated in the Jesuit school
at Bordeaux, entered the order, and became a priest, but was released
from office at his own wish in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1639, on account of delicate health.
Even in the Jesuit college the principles that manifested themselves
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
in his later life began to take root in him. By Scripture study he
was led to adopt almost Augustinian views of sin and grace, as well
as the conviction of the need of a revival of the church after the
apostolic pattern. This tendency was confirmed and deepened by the
influence of Spanish Quietism, which even the Jesuits had favoured
to some extent. In the interest of these views he wrought laboriously
for eleven years as Catholic priest in Amiens, Paris, and other
places, amid the increasing hostility of the Jesuits. Their persecution,
together with a growing clearness in his Augustinian convictions,
led him formally to go over to the Reformed church in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1650. He now laboured for seven years as Reformed pastor at
Montauban. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1657, owing to political suspicions against him
spread by the Jesuits, he withdrew from Montauban, and, after two
years' labour at Orange, settled at Geneva, where his preaching and
household visitations bore abundant fruit. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1666 he accepted a
call to Middelburg, in Zealand. There he was almost as successful
as he had been in Geneva; but there too it began to appear that in
him there burned a fire strange to the Reformed church. The French
Reformed synod took great offence at his refusal to sign the Belgic
Confession. It was found that at many points he was not in sympathy
with the church standards, that he had written in favour of chiliasm
and the Apokatastasis, that in regard to the nature and idea of
the church and its need of a reformation he was not in accord with
the views of the Reformed church. The synod in 1668 suspended
him from office, and, as he did not confess his errors, in the following
year deposed him. Labadie then saw that what he regarded
as his lifework, the restoration of the apostolic church, was as little
attainable within the Reformed as within the Catholic church. He
therefore organized his followers into a separate denomination, and
was, together with them, banished by the magistrate. The neighbouring
town of Veere received them gladly, but Middelburg now persuaded
the Zealand council to issue a decree banishing them from that
town also. The people of Veere were ready to defy this order, but
Labadie thought it better to avoid the risk of a civil war by voluntary
withdrawal; and so he went, in August, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1669, with about forty
followers, to Amsterdam, where he laid the foundations of an apostolic
church. This new society consisted of a sort of monastic household
consisting only of the regenerate. They hired a commodious house, and
from thence sent out spiritual workers as missionaries, to spread the
principles of the <q>new church</q> throughout the land. Within a year
they numbered 60,000 souls. They dispensed the sacrament according
to the Reformed rite, and preached the gospel in conventicles. The
most important gain to the party was the adhesion of Anna Maria
von Schürman, born at Cologne <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1607 of a Reformed family, but
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
settled from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1623 with her mother in Utrecht, celebrated for her
unexampled attainment in languages, science, and art. When in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1670, the government, urged by the synod, forbad attendance on
the Labadists' preaching, the accomplished and pious Countess-palatine
Elizabeth, sister of the elector-palatine, and abbess of the
rich cloister of Herford, whose intimate friend Schürman had been
for forty years, gave them an asylum in the capital of her little
state.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_8'/>
8. In Herford <q>the Hollanders</q> met with bitter opposition from
the Lutheran clergy, the magistracy, and populace, and were treated by
the mob with insult and scorn. They themselves also gave only too
good occasion for ridicule. At a sacramental celebration, the aged
Labadie and still older Schürman embraced and kissed each other
and began to dance for joy. In his sermons and writings Labadie set
forth the Quietist doctrines of the limitation of Christ's life and sufferings
in the mortification of the flesh, the duty of silent prayer, the
sinking of the soul into the depths of the Godhead, the community of
goods, etc. Special offence was given by the private marriage of the
three leaders, Labadie, Yvon, and Dulignon with young wealthy ladies
of society, and their views of marriage among the regenerate as an
institution for raising up a pure seed free from original sin and
brought forth without pain. The Elector of Brandenburg, hitherto
favourable, as guardian of the seminary was obliged, in answer to
the complaints of the Herford magistracy, to appoint a commission of
inquiry. Labadie wrote a defence, which was published in Latin,
Dutch, and German, in which he endeavoured to harmonize his mystical
views with the doctrines of the Reformed church. But in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1671
the magistrates obtained a mandate from the imperial court at Spires,
which threatened the abbess with the ban if she continued to harbour
the sectaries. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1672 Labadie settled in Altona, where he died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1674. His followers, numbering 160, remained here undisturbed
till the war between Denmark and Sweden broke out in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1675.
They then retired to the castle of Waltha in West Friesland, the
property of three sisters belonging to the party. Schürman died in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1678, Dulignon in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1679, and Yvon, who now had sole charge,
was obliged in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1688 to abolish the institution of the community of
goods, after a trial of eighteen years, being able to pay back much less
than he had received. After his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1707 the community
gradually fell off, and after the property had gone into other hands
on the death of the last of the sisters in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1725, the society finally
broke up.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_9'/>
9. During this age various <emph>fanatical sects</emph> sprang up. In Thuringia,
<emph>Stiefel</emph> and his nephew <emph>Meth</emph> caused much trouble to the Lutheran
clergy in the beginning of the century by their fanatical enthusiasm,
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
till convinced, after twenty years, of the errors of their ways. <emph>Drabicius</emph>,
who had left the Bohemian Brethren owing to differences of belief, and
then lived in Hungary as a weaver in poor circumstances, boasted in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1638 of having Divine revelations, prophesied the overthrow of
the Austrian dynasty in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1657, the election of the French king
as emperor, the speedy fall of the Papacy, and the final conversion
of all heathens; but was put to death at Pressburg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1671 as a
traitor with cruel tortures. Even Comenius, the noble bishop of the
Moravians, took the side of the prophets, and published his own and
others' prophecies under the title <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lux in Tenebris</foreign>.</q>&mdash;<emph>Jane Leade</emph> of
Norfolk, influenced by the writings of Böhme, had visions, in which the
Divine Wisdom appeared to her as a virgin. She spread her Gnostic
revelations in numerous tracts, founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1670 the Philadelphian
Society in London, and died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1704, at the age of eighty-one.
The most important of her followers was <emph>John Pordage</emph>, preacher and
physician, whose theological speculation closely resembles that of Jac.
Böhme. To the Reformed church belonged also <emph>Peter Poiret</emph> of Metz,
pastor from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1664 in Heidelburg, and afterwards of a French congregation
in the Palatine-Zweibrücken. Influenced by the writings
of Bourignon and Guyon, he resigned his pastorate, and accompanied
the former in his wanderings in north-west Germany till his death
in 1680. At Amsterdam in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1687 he wrote his mystical work,
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>L'Économie Divine</foreign></q> in seven vols., which sets forth in the Cocceian
method the mysticism and theosophy of Bourignon. He died at
Rhynsburg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1719.&mdash;From the Lutheran church proceeded
Giftheil of Württemburg, Breckling of Holstein, and Kuhlmann, who
went about denouncing the clergy, proclaiming fanatical views, and
calling for impracticable reforms. Of much greater importance was
<emph>John George Gichtel</emph>, an eccentric disciple of Jac. Böhme, who in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1665 lost his situation as law agent in his native town of Regensburg,
his property, and civil rights, and suffered imprisonment and exile
from the city for his fanatical ideas. He died in needy circumstances
in Amsterdam in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1710. He had revelations and visions, fought
against the doctrine of justification, and denounced marriage as fornication
which nullifies the spiritual marriage with the heavenly Sophia
consummated in the new birth, etc. His followers called themselves
Angelic Brethren, from Matthew xxii. 20, strove after angelic sinlessness
by emancipation from all earthly lusts, toils, and care, regarded
themselves as a priesthood after the order of Melchizedec for propitiating
the Divine wrath.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_170'>§ 170</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_163_Para_10'/>
10. <emph>Russian Sects.</emph>&mdash;A vast number of sects sprang up within the Russian
church, which are all included under the general name <emph>Raskolniks</emph>
or apostates. They fall into two great classes in their distinctive
character, diametrically opposed the one to the other. (1) The
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
<emph>Starowerzi</emph>, or Old Believers. They originated in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1652, in consequence
of the liturgical reform of the learned and powerful patriarch
Nikon, which called forth the violent opposition of a large
body of the peasantry, who loved the old forms. Besides stubborn
adhesion to the old liturgy, they rejected all modern customs and
luxuries, held it sinful to cut the beard, to smoke tobacco, to drink tea
and coffee, etc. The Starowerzi, numbering some ten millions, are to
this day distinguished by their pure and simple lives, and are split up
into three parties: (i.) <emph>Jedinowerzi</emph>, who are nearest to the orthodox
church, recognise its priesthood, and are different only in their religious
ceremonies and the habits of their social life; (ii.) The <emph>Starovbradzi</emph>,
who do not recognise the priesthood of the orthodox church;
and (iii.) the <emph>Bespopowtschini</emph>, who have no priests, but only elders,
and are split up into various smaller sects. Under the peasant Philip
Pustosiwät, a party of Starowerzi, called from their leader Philippius,
fled during the persecution of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1700 from the government of Olonez,
and settled in Polish Lithuania and East Prussia, where to the number
of 1,200 souls they live to this day in villages in the district
of Gumbinnen, engaged in agricultural pursuits, and observing the
rites of the old Russian church.&mdash;(2) At the very opposite pole from
the Starowerzi stand the <hi rend='smallcaps'>Heretical Sects</hi>, which repudiate and condemn
everything in the shape of external church organization, and
manifest a tendency in some cases toward fanatical excess, and in
other cases toward rationalistic spiritualism. As the sects showing
the latter tendency did not make their appearance till the eighteenth
century (<ref target='Section_166_Para_2'>§ 166, 2</ref>), we have here to do only with those of the former
class. The most important of these sects is that of the <emph>Men of God</emph>, or
Spiritual Christians, who trace their origin from a peasant, Danila
Filipow, of the province of Wladimir. In 1645, say they, the divine
Father, seated on a cloud of flame, surrounded by angels, descended
from heaven on Mount Gorodin in a chariot of fire, in order to restore
true Christianity in its original purity and spirituality. For this
purpose he incarnated himself in Filipow's pure body. He commanded
his followers, who in large numbers, mainly drawn from the
peasant class, gathered around him, not to marry, and if already
married to put away their wives, to abstain from all intoxicating
drinks, to be present neither at marriages nor baptisms, but above
all things to believe that there is no other god besides him. After
some years he adopted as his son another peasant, Ivan Suslow, who
was said to have been born of a woman a hundred years old, by communicating
to him in his thirtieth year his own divine nature. Ivan,
as a new Christ, sent out twelve apostles to spread his doctrine. The
Czar Alexis put him and forty of his adherents into prison; but
neither the knout nor the rack could wring from them the mysteries
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
of their faith and worship. At last, on a Friday, the czar caused the
new Christ to be crucified; but on the following Sunday he appeared
risen again among his disciples. After some years the imprisoning,
crucifying, and resurrection were repeated. Imprisoned a third time
in 1672, he owed his liberation to an edict of grace on the occasion of
the birth of the Prince Peter the Great. He now lived at Moscow
along with the divine father Filipow, who had hitherto consulted his
own safety by living in concealment in the enjoyment of the adoration
of his followers unmolested for thirty years, supported by certain
wealthy merchants. Filipow is said to have ascended up in the presence
of many witnesses, in 1700, into the seventh and highest heaven,
where he immediately seated himself on the throne as the <q>Lord of
Hosts,</q> and the Christ, Suslow, also returned thither in 1716, after
both had reached the hundredth year of the human existence. As
Suslow's successor appeared a new Christ in Prokopi Lupkin, and,
after his death, in 1732, arose Andr. Petrow. The last Christ manifestation
was revealed in the person of the unfortunate Czar Peter
III., dethroned by his wife Catharine II. in 1762, who, living meanwhile
in secret, shall soon return, to the terrible confusion of all
unbelievers. With this the historical tradition of the earlier sect of
the Men of God is brought to a close, and in the Skopsen, or Eunuchs,
who also venerate the Czar Peter III. as the Christ that is to come
again, a new development of the sect has arisen, carrying out its
principles more and more fully (<ref target='Section_210_Para_4'>§ 210, 4</ref>). Other branches of the
same party, among which, as also among the Skopsen, the fanatical
endeavour to mortify the flesh is carried to the most extravagant
length, are the Morelschiki or Self-Flagellators, the Dumbies, who will
not, even under the severest tortures, utter a sound, etc. The ever-increasing
development of this sect-forming craze, which found its
way into several monasteries and nunneries, led to repeated judicial
investigations, the penitent being sentenced for their fault to confinement
in remote convents, and the obdurate being visited with severe
corporal punishments and even with death. The chief sources of
information regarding the history, doctrine, and customs of the <q>Men
of God</q> and the Skopsen are their own numerous spiritual songs,
collected by Prof. Ivan Dobrotworski of Kasan, which were sung in
their assemblies for worship with musical accompaniment and solemn
dances. On these occasions their prophets and prophetesses were
wont to prophesy, and a kind of sacramental supper was celebrated
with bread and water. The sacraments of the Lord's supper and
baptism, as administered by the orthodox church, are repudiated and
scorned, the latter as displaced by the only effectual baptism of the
Spirit. They have, indeed, in order to avoid persecution, been
obliged to take part in the services of the orthodox national church,
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
and to confess to its priests, avoiding, however, all reference to the
sect.<note place='foot'>Heard, <q>The Russian Church and Russian Dissent.</q> London,
1887. Mackenzie Wallace, <q>Russia,</q> chaps, xiv., xx. 2 vols. London,
1877. Palmer, <q>The Patriarch and the Tsar.</q> 6 vols. London,
1871-1876.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 164. Philosophers and Freethinkers.<note place='foot'>Ueberweg, <q>History of Philosophy,</q> vol. ii., pp. 31-135. Pünjer,
<q>History of the Christian Philosophy of Religion from the Reformation
to Kant.</q> Edin., 1887. Pfleiderer, <q>Philosophy of Religion,</q>
vol. i. London, 1887. Erdmann's <q>History of Philosophy.</q> 3 vols.
London, 1889.</note></head>

<p>
The mediæval scholastic philosophy had outlived itself,
even in the pre-Reformation age; yet it maintained a lingering
existence side by side with those new forms which the
modern spirit in philosophy was preparing for itself. We
hear an echo of the philosophical ferment of the sixteenth
century in the Italian Dominican Campanella, and in the
Englishman Bacon of Verulam we meet the pioneer of
that modern philosophy which had its proper founder in
Descartes. Spinoza, Locke, and Leibnitz were in succession
the leaders of this philosophical development. Alongside of
this philosophy, and deriving its weapons from it for attack
upon theology and the church, a number of freethinkers
also make their appearance. These, like their more radical
disciples in the following century, regarded Scripture as
delusive, and nature and reason as alone trustworthy sources
of religious knowledge.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_164_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Philosophy.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Campanella</emph> of Stilo in Calabria entered the Dominican
order, but soon lost taste for Aristotelian philosophy and scholastic
theology, and gave himself to the study of Plato, the Cabbala, astrology,
magic, etc. Suspected of republican tendencies, the Spanish government
put him in prison in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1599. Seven times was he put upon
the rack for twenty-four hours, and then confined for twenty-seven
years in close confinement. Finally, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1626, Urban VIII. had him
transferred to the prison of the papal Inquisition. He was set free in
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1629, and received a papal pension; but further persecutions by the
Spaniards obliged him to fly to his protector Richelieu in France,
where in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1639 he died. He composed eighty-two treatises, mostly
in prison, the most complete being <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Philosophia Rationalis</foreign>,</q> in five vols.
In his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Atheismus Triumphatus</foreign></q> he appears as an apologist of the Romish
system, but so insufficiently, that many said <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Atheismus Triumphans</foreign> was
the more fitting title. His <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Monarchia Messiæ</foreign></q> too appeared, even to
the Catholics, an abortive apology for the Papacy. In his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Civitas Solis</foreign>,</q>
an imitation of the <q>Republic</q> of Plato, he proceeded upon communistic
principles.&mdash;<emph>Francis Bacon of Verulam</emph>, long chancellor of England, died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1626, the great spiritual heir of his mediæval namesake (§ 103, 8),
was the first successful reformer of the plan of study followed by the
schoolmen. With a prophet's marvellous grasp of mind he organized
the whole range of science, and gave a forecast of its future development
in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Augmentis</foreign></q> and <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Novum Organon</foreign>.</q> He rigidly separated
the domain of <emph>knowledge</emph>, as that of philosophy and nature, grasped
only by experience, from the domain of <emph>faith</emph>, as that of theology and
the church, reached only through revelation. Yet he maintained the
position: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Philosophia obiter libata a Deo abducit, plene hausta ad Deum
reducit</foreign>. He is the real author of empiricism in philosophy and the
realistic methods of modern times. His public life, however, is clouded
by thanklessness, want of character, and the taking of bribes. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1621 he was convicted by his peers, deprived of his office, sentenced to
imprisonment for life in the Tower, and to pay a fine of £40,000; but
was pardoned by the king.<note place='foot'><q>Bacon's Works,</q> ed. by Spedding, Ellis, and Heath. 14 vols.
London, 1870. Spedding, <q>Letters and Life of Lord Bacon.</q> 2 vols.
London, 1862. Macaulay on Bacon in <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh Review</hi> for 1837.
Church, <q>Bacon</q> in vol. v. of <q>Collected Works.</q> London, 1888.
Nichol, <q>Bacon: Life and Philosophy.</q> 2 vols. Edin., 1888.</note>&mdash;The French Catholic <emph>Descartes</emph> started
not from experience, but from self-consciousness, with his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cogito, ergo
sum</foreign></q> as the only absolutely certain proposition. Beginning with
doubt, he rose by pure thinking to the knowledge of the true and certain
in things. The imperfection of the soul thus discovered suggests
an absolutely perfect Being, to whose perfection the attribute of being
belongs. This is the ontological proof for the being of God.&mdash;His
philosophy was zealously taken up by French Jansenists and Oratorians
and the Reformed theologians of Holland, while it was bitterly
opposed by such Catholics as Huetius and such Reformed theologians
as Voetius.<note place='foot'><q>Descartes' Method, Meditations, and Principles of Philosophy.</q>
Transl. by Prof. Veitch. Edin., 1850 ff. Fischer, <q>Descartes and his
School.</q> London, 1887.</note>&mdash;<emph>Spinoza</emph>, an apostate Jew in Holland, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1677,
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
gained little influence over his own generation by his profound pantheistic
philosophy, which has powerfully affected later ages. A
violent controversy, however, was occasioned by his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tractatus Theologico-politicus</foreign>,</q>
in which he attacked the Christian doctrine of revelation
and the authenticity of the O.T. books, especially the Pentateuch,
and advocated absolute freedom of thought.<note place='foot'>Willis, <q>Spinoza: his Ethics, Life, and Influence on Modern
Thought.</q> London, 1870. Pollock, <q>Spinoza: his Life and Philosophy.</q>
London, 1880. Martineau, <q>Spinoza.</q> London, 1882.
<q>Spinoza, Four Essays by Land, Von Floten, Fischer, and Renan.</q>
Edited by Prof. Knight. London, 1884.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_164_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>John Locke</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1704, with his sensationalism took up a position midway between
Bacon's empiricism and Descartes' rationalism, on the one hand, and
English deism and French materialism, on the other. His <q>Essay
concerning Human Understanding</q> denies the existence of innate ideas,
and seeks to show that all our notions are only products of outer
or inner experience, of sensation or reflection. In this treatise, and
still more distinctly in his tract, <q>The Reasonableness of Christianity,</q>
intended as an apology for Christianity, and even for biblical visions
and miracles, as well as for the messianic character of Christ, he
openly advocated pure Pelagianism that knows nothing of sin and
atonement.<note place='foot'><q>Locke's Complete Works.</q> 9 vols. London, 1853. Cousin, <q>Elements
of Psychology: a Critical Examination of Locke's Essay.</q>
Edin., 1856. Webb, <q>Intellectualism of Locke.</q> London, 1858.</note>&mdash;<emph>Leibnitz</emph>, a Hanoverian statesman, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1716,
introduced the new German philosophy in its first stage. The philosophy
of Leibnitz is opposed at once to the theosophy of Paracelsus
and Böhme and to the empiricism of Bacon and Locke, the pantheism
of Spinoza, and the scepticism and manichæism of Bayle. It is indeed
a Christian philosophy not fully developed. But inasmuch as at the
same time it adopted, improved upon, and carried out the rationalism
of Descartes, it also paved the way for the later theological rationalism.
The foundation of his philosophy is the theory of monads wrought out
in his <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Theodicée</foreign></q> against Bayle and in his <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Nouveaux Essais</foreign>,</q> against
Locke. In opposition to the atomic theory of the materialists, he regarded
all phenomena in the world as eccentricities of so called monads,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> primary simple and indivisible substances, each of which is a miniature
of the whole universe. Out of these monads that radiate out from
God, the primary monad, the world is formed into a harmony once for
all admired of God: the theory of pre-established harmony. This must
be the best of worlds, otherwise it would not have been. In opposition
to Bayle, who had argued in a manichæan fashion against God's
goodness and wisdom from the existence of evil, Leibnitz seeks to show
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
that this does not contradict the idea of the best of worlds, nor that of
the Divine goodness and wisdom, since finity and imperfection belong
to the very notion of creature, a metaphysical evil from which moral
evil inevitably follows, yet not so as to destroy the pre-established
harmony. Against Locke he maintains the doctrine of innate ideas,
contests Clarke's theory of indeterminism, maintains the agreement of
philosophy with revelation, which indeed is above but not contrary to
reason, and hopes to prove his system by mathematical demonstration.<note place='foot'>Guhrauer, <q>Leibnitz: a Biography.</q> Transl. by Mackie. Boston,
1845.</note>&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_171_Para_10'>§ 171, 10</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_164_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Freethinkers.</emph>&mdash;The tendency of the age to throw off all positive
Christianity first showed itself openly in England as the final outcome
of Levellerism (<ref target='Section_162_Para_2'>§ 162, 2</ref>). This movement has been styled naturalism,
because it puts natural in place of revealed religion, and deism,
because in place of the redeeming work of the triune God it admits
only a general providence of the one God. On philosophic grounds
the English deists affirmed the impossibility of revelation, inspiration,
prophecy, and miracle, and on critical grounds rejected them from
the Bible and history. The simple religious system of deism embraced
God, providence, freedom of the will, virtue, and the immortality of
the soul. The Christian doctrines of the Trinity, original sin, satisfaction,
justification, resurrection, etc., were regarded as absurd and
irrational. Deism in England spread almost exclusively among upper-class
laymen; the people and clergy stood firmly to their positive
beliefs. Theological controversial tracts were numerous, but their
polemical force was in great measure lost by the latitudinarianism of
their authors.&mdash;The principal English deists of the century were
(1) <emph>Edward Herbert of Cherbury</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1581-1648, a nobleman and statesman.
He reduced all religion to five points: Faith in God, the duty
of reverencing Him, especially by leading an upright life, atoning
for sin by genuine repentance, recompense in the life eternal.&mdash;(2)
<emph>Thomas Hobbes</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1588-1679, an acute philosophical and political
writer, looked on Christianity as an oriental phantom, and of value
only as a support of absolute monarchy and an antidote to revolution.
The state of nature is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>bellum omnium contra omnes</foreign>; religion is the
means of establishing order and civilization. The state should decide
what religion is to prevail. Every one may indeed believe what he
will, but in regard to churches and worship he must submit to the
state as represented by the king. His chief work is <q>Leviathan; or,
The Matter, Form, and Power of a Commonwealth, Ecclesiastical and
Civil.</q>&mdash;(3) <emph>Charles Blount</emph>, who died a suicide in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1693, a rabid
opponent of all miracles as mere tricks of priests, wrote <q>Oracles of
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
Reason,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Religio Laici</foreign>,</q> <q>Great is Diana of the Ephesians,</q> that
translated Philostratus' <q>Life of Apollonius of Tyana.</q>&mdash;(4) <emph>Thomas
Browne</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1635-1682, a physician, who in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Religio Medici</foreign></q> sets
forth a mystical supernaturalism, took up a purely deistic ground
in his <q>Vulgar Errors,</q> published three years later.&mdash;Among the
opponents of deism in this age the most notable are Richard Baxter
(<ref target='Section_162_Para_3'>§ 162, 3</ref>) and Ralph Cudworth, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1617-1688, a latitudinarian and
Platonist, who sought to prove the leading Christian doctrines by
the theory of innate ideas. He wrote <q>Intellectual System of the
Universe</q> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1678. The pious Irish scientist, Robert Boyle,
founded in London, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1691, a lectureship of £40 a year for
eight discourses against deistic and atheistic unbelief.<note place='foot'>Leland, <q>View of Principal Deistical Writers in England.</q> 2nd
ed. 2 vols. London, 1755. Halyburton, <q>Natural Religion Insufficient;
or, A Rational Inquiry into the Principles of the Modern
Deists.</q> Edin., 1714. Tulloch, <q>Rational Theology and Christian
Philosophy in England in the 17th Century.</q> 2 vols. Edin., 1872.
Cairns, <q>Unbelief in the 18th Century,</q> chap, ii., <q>Unbelief in the
17th Century.</q> Edin., 1881.</note>&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>§ 171, 1</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_164_Para_4'/>
4. A tendency similar to that of the English deists was represented
in Germany by <emph>Matthias Knutzen</emph>, who sought to found a freethinking
sect. The Christian <q>Coran</q> contains only lies; reason and conscience
are the true Bible; there is no God, nor hell nor heaven; priests and
magistrates should be driven out of the world, etc. The senate of
Jena University on investigation found that his pretension to 700
followers was a vain boast.&mdash;In France the brilliant and learned
sceptic <emph>Peter Bayle</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1647-1706, was the apostle of a light-hearted
unbelief. Though son of a Reformed pastor, the Jesuits got him over
to the Romish church, but in a year and a half he apostatised again.
He now studied the Cartesian philosophy, as Reformed professor at
Sedan, vindicated Protestantism in several controversial tracts, and as
refugee in Holland composed his famous <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Dictionnaire Historique
et Critique</foreign>,</q> in which he avoided indeed open rejection of the facts of
revelation, but did much to unsettle by his easy treatment of them.&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_171_Para_3'>§ 171, 3</ref>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Third Section. Church History Of The Eighteenth
Century.<note place='foot'>Lecky, <q>History of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit of Rationalism
in Europe.</q> 2 vols. London, 1873. Hagenbach, <q>German
Rationalism.</q> Edin., 1865. Hagenbach, <q>History of Church in 18th
and 19th Centuries.</q> 2 vols. London, 1870. Leslie Stephen, <q>History
of English Thought in the 18th Century.</q> 2 vols. London, 1876.
Cairns, <q>Unbelief in the 18th Century.</q> Edin., 1881.</note></head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. The Catholic Church in East and West.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_165'/>
<head>§ 165. The Roman Catholic Church.</head>

<p>
During the first half of the century the Roman hierarchy
suffered severely at the hand of Catholic courts, while in the
second half storms gathered from all sides, threatening its
very existence. Portugal, France, Spain, and Italy rested
not till they got the pope himself to strike the deathblow
to the Jesuits, who had been his chief supporters indeed, but
who had now become his masters. Soon after the German
bishops threatened to free themselves and their people from
Rome, and what reforms they could not effect by ecclesiastical
measures the emperor undertook to effect by civil
measures. Scarcely had this danger been overcome when
the horrors of the French Revolution broke out, which
sought, along with the Papacy, to overthrow Christianity as
well. But, on the other hand, during the early decades of
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
the century Catholicism had gained many victories in another
way by the counter-reformation and conversions. Its foreign
missions, however, begun with such promise of success, came
to a sad end, and even the home missions faded away, in
spite of the founding of various new orders. The Jansenist
controversy in the beginning of the century entered on a
new stage, the Catholic church being driven into open semi-Pelagianism,
and Jansenism into fanatical excesses. The
church theology sank very low, and the Catholic supporters
of <q><emph>Illumination</emph></q> far exceeded in number those who had
fallen away to it from Protestantism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Popes.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Clement XI.</emph>, 1700-1721, protested in vain against the
Elector Frederick III. of Brandenburg assuming the crown as King
Frederick I. of Prussia, on Jan. 18th, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1701. In the Spanish wars
of succession he sought to remain neutral, but force of circumstances
led him to take up a position adverse to German interests. The new
German emperor, Joseph I., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1705-1711, scorned to seek confirmation
from the pope, and Clement consequently had the usual prayer for
the emperor omitted in the church services. The relations became yet
more strained, owing to a dispute about the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jus primarum precum</foreign>,
Joseph claiming the right to revenues of vacancies as the patron. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1707, the pope had the joy of seeing the German army driven out,
not only of northern Italy, but also of Naples by the French. Again
they came into direct conflict over Parma and Piacenza, Clement
claiming them as a papal, the emperor claiming them as an imperial,
fief. No pope since the time of Louis the Bavarian had issued the
ban against a German emperor, and Clement ventured not to do so
now. Refusing the invitation of Louis XIV. to go to Avignon, he
was obliged either unconditionally to grant the German claims or to
try the fortune of war. He chose the latter alternative. The miserable
papal troops, however, were easily routed, and Clement was
obliged, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1708, to acknowledge the emperor's brother, the Grand-duke
Charles, as king of Spain, and generally to yield to Joseph's very
moderate demands. Clement was the author of the constitution
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unigenitus</foreign>, which introduced the second stage in the history of Jansenism.
After the short and peaceful pontificate of <emph>Innocent XIII.</emph>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1721-1724, came <emph>Benedict XIII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1724-1730, a pious, well-meaning,
narrow-minded man, ruled by a worthless favourite, Cardinal
Coscia. He wished to canonize Gregory VII., in the fond hope of
thereby securing new favour to his hierarchical views, but this was
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
protested against by almost all the courts. All the greater was the
number of monkish saints with which he enriched the heavenly firmament.
He promised to all who on their death-bed should say, <q>Blessed
be Jesus Christ,</q> a 2,000 years' shortening of purgatorial pains. His
successor <emph>Clement XII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1730-1740, deprived the wretched Coscia
of his offices, made him disgorge his robberies, imposed on him a
severe fine and ten years' imprisonment, but afterwards resigned the
management of everything to a greedy, grasping nephew. He was
the first pope to condemn freemasonry, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1736. <emph>Benedict XIV.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1740-1758, one of the noblest, most pious, learned, and liberal of the
popes, zealous for the faith of his church, and yet patient with those
who differed, moderate and wise in his political procedure, mild and
just in his government, blameless in life. He had a special dislike of
the Jesuits (§ 155, 12), and jestingly he declared, if, as the curialists
assert, <q>all law and all truth</q> lie concealed in the shrine of his
breast, he had not been able to find the key. He wrote largely on
theology and canon law, founded seminaries for the training of the
clergy, had many French and English works translated into Italian,
and was a liberal patron of art. To check popular excesses he tried
to reduce the number of festivals, but without success.&mdash;Continuation,
in Paragraphs <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>9</ref>, <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>10</ref>, <ref target='Section_165_Para_13'>13</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Old and New Orders.</emph>&mdash;Among the old orders that of <emph>Clugny</emph> had
amassed enormous wealth, and attempts made by its abbots at reformation
led only to endless quarrels and divisions. The abbots now
squandered the revenues of their cloisters at court, and these institutions
were allowed to fall into disorder and decay. When, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1790, all cloisters in France were suppressed, the city of Clugny bought
the cloister and church for £4,000, and had them both pulled down.&mdash;The
most important new orders were: (1) <emph>The Mechitarist Congregation</emph>,
originated by Mechitar the Armenian, who, at Constantinople in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1701, founded a society for the religious and intellectual education of
his countrymen; but when opposed by the Armenian patriarch, fled
to the Morea and joined the United Armenians (§ 72, 2). In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1712
the pope confirmed the congregation, which, during the war with the
Turks was transferred to Venice, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1717 settled on the
island St. Lazaro. Its members spread Roman Catholic literature in
Armenia and Armenian literature in the West. At a later time there
was a famous Mechitarist college in Vienna, which did much by
writing and publishing for the education of the Catholic youth.&mdash;(2)
<emph>Frères Ignorantins</emph>, or Christian Brothers, founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1725 by De la
Salle, canon of Rheims, for the instruction of children, wrought in the
spirit of the Jesuits through France, Belgium, and North America.
After the expulsion of the Jesuits from France in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1724, they took
their place there till themselves driven out by the Revolution in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
1790.<note place='foot'>Wilson, <q>The Christian Brothers, their Origin and Work.
With a Sketch of the Life of their Founder, the Venerable Jean
Baptiste de la Salle.</q> London, 1883.</note>&mdash;(3) The <emph>Liguorians or Redemptorists</emph>, founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1732 by
Liguori, an advocate, who became Bishop of Naples in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1762. He
died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1787 in his ninety-first year, was beatified by Pius VII.
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1816, and canonized by Gregory XVI. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1839, and proclaimed
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>doctor ecclesiæ</foreign> by Pius IX. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871 as a zealous defender of
the immaculate conception and papal infallibility. His devotional
writings, which exalt Mary by superstitious tales of miracles, were
extremely popular in all Catholic countries. His new order was to
minister to the poor. He declared the pope's will to be God's, and
called for unquestioning obedience. Only after the founder's death
did it spread beyond Italy.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_186_Para_1'>§ 186, 1</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Foreign Missions.</emph>&mdash;In the accommodation controversy (<ref target='Section_156_Para_12'>§ 156, 12</ref>),
the Dominicans prevailed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1742; but the abolishing of native
customs led to a sore persecution in China, from which only a few
remnants of the church were saved. The Italian Jesuit Beschi, with
linguistic talents of the highest order, sought in India to make use of
the native literature for mission purposes and to place alongside of it
a Christian literature. Here the Capuchins opposed the Jesuits as
successfully as the Dominicans had in China. These strifes and persecutions
destroyed the missions.&mdash;The Jesuit state of Paraguay (<ref target='Section_156_Para_10'>§ 156,
10</ref>) was put an end to in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750 by a compact between Portugal
and Spain. The revolt of the Indians that followed, inspired and
directed by the Jesuits, which kept the combined powers at bay for a
whole year, was at last quelled, and the Jesuits expelled the country
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1758.&mdash;Continuation <ref target='Section_186_Para_7'>§ 186, 7</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Counter-Reformation</emph> (<ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>§ 153, 2</ref>).&mdash;Charles XII. of Sweden, in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1707, forced the Emperor Joseph I. to give the Protestants of
<emph>Silesia</emph> the benefits of the Westphalian Peace and to restore their
churches. But in <emph>Poland</emph> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1717, the Protestants lost the right of
building new churches, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1733 were declared disqualified for
civil offices and places in the diet. In the Protestant city of Thorn
the insolence of the Jesuits roused a rebellion which led to a fearful
massacre in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1724. The Dissenters sought and obtained protection
in Russia from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1767, and the partition of Poland between Russia,
Austria, and Prussia in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1772 secured for them religious toleration.
In <emph>Salzburg</emph> the archbishop, Count Firmian, attempted in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1729 a
conversion of the evangelicals by force, who had, with intervals of persecution
in the seventeenth century, been tolerated for forty years as
quiet and inoffensive citizens. But in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1731 their elders swore on
the host and consecrated salt (2 Chron. xiii. 5) to be true to their faith.
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
This <q>covenant of salt</q> was interpreted as rebellion, and in spite of
the intervention of the Protestant princes, all the evangelicals, in the
severe winter of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1731, 1732, were driven, with inhuman cruelty,
from hearth and home. About 20,000 of them found shelter in
Prussian Lithuania; others emigrated to America. The pope praised
highly <q>the noble</q> archbishop, who otherwise distinguished himself
only as a huntsman and a drinker, and by maintaining a mistress in
princely splendour.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_5'/>
5. In <emph>France</emph> the persecution of the Huguenots continued (<ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>§ 153, 4</ref>).
The <q>pastors of the desert</q> performed their duties at the risk of
their lives, and though many fell as martyrs, their places were quickly
filled by others equally heroic. The first rank belongs to Anton Court,
pastor at Nismes from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1715; he died at Lausanne <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1760, where
he had founded a theological seminary. He laboured unweariedly
and successfully in gathering and organizing the scattered members
of the Reformed church, and in overcoming fanaticism by imparting
sound instruction. Paul Rabaut, his successor at Nismes, was from
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1780 to 1785 the faithful and capable leader of the martyr church.
The judicial murder of <emph>Jean Calas</emph> at Toulouse in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1762 presents a
hideous example of the fanaticism of Catholic France. One of his
sons had hanged himself in a fit of passion. When the report spread
that it was the act of his father, in order to prevent the contemplated
conversion of his son, the Dominicans canonized the suicide as a
martyr to the Catholic faith, roused the mob, and got the Toulouse
parliament to put the unhappy father to the torture of the wheel.
The other sons were forced to abjure their faith, and the daughters were
shut up in cloisters. Two years later Voltaire called attention to the
atrocity, and so wrought on public opinion that on the revision of the
proceedings by the Parisian parliament, the innocence of the ill-used
family was clearly proved. Louis XV. paid them a sum of 30,000
livres; but the fanatical accusers, the false witnesses, and the corrupt
judges were left unpunished. This incident improved the position of
the Protestants, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1787 Louis XVI. issued the Edict of
Versailles, by which not only complete religious freedom but even a legal
civil existence was secured them, which was confirmed by a law of
Napoleon in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1802.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Conversions.</emph>&mdash;Pecuniary interests and prospect of marriage with
a rich heiress led to the conversion, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1712, of Charles Alexander
while in the Austrian service; but when he became Duke of Württemburg
he solemnly undertook to keep things as they were, and to set
up no Catholic services in the country save in his own court chapel.
Of other converts Winckelmann and Stolberg are the most famous.
While Winckelmann, the greatest of art critics, not a religious but an
artistic ultramontane, was led in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1754 through religious indifference
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
into the Romish church, the warm heart of Von Stolberg was
induced, mainly by the Catholic Princess Gallitzin (<ref target='Section_172_Para_2'>§ 172, 2</ref>) and a
French emigrant, Madame Montague, to escape the chill of rationalism
amid the incense fumes of the Catholic services.&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>§ 175, 7</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>The Second Stage of Jansenism (<ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>§ 157, 5</ref>).</emph>&mdash;<emph>Pasquier Quesnel</emph>, priest of
the Oratory at Paris, suspected in 1675 of Gallicanism, because of notes
in his edition of the works of Leo the Great, fled into the Netherlands,
where he continued his notes on the N.T. Used and recommended by
Noailles, Archbishop of Paris, and other French bishops, this <q>Jansenist</q>
book was hated by the Jesuits and condemned by a brief of
Clement XI. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1708. The Jesuit confessor of Louis XIV., Le
Tellier, selected 101 propositions from the book, and induced the king
to urge their express condemnation by the pope. In the <emph>Constitution
Unigenitus</emph> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1713, Clement pronounced these heretical, and the
king required the expulsion from parliament and church of all who
refused to adopt this bull, which caused a division of the French
church into <emph>Acceptants</emph> and <emph>Appellants</emph>. As many of the condemned
propositions were quoted literally by Quesnel from Augustine and
other Fathers, or were in exact agreement with biblical passages,
Noailles and his party called for an explanation. Instead of this the
pope threatened them with excommunication. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1715 the king
died, and under the Duke of Orleans' regency in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1717, four bishops,
with solemn appeal to a general council, renounced the papal constitution
as irreconcilable with the Catholic faith. They were soon
joined by the Sorbonne and the universities of Rheims and Nantes,
Archbishop Noailles, and more than twenty bishops, all the congregations
of St. Maur and the Oratorians with large numbers of the
secular clergy and the monks, especially of the Lazarists, Dominicans,
Cistercians, and Camaldulensians. The pope, after vainly calling
them to obey, thundered the ban against the Appellants in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1718.
But the parliament took the matter up, and soon the aspect of affairs
was completely changed. The regent's favourite, Dubois, hoping to
obtain a cardinal's hat, took the side of the Acceptants and carried
the duke with him, who got the parliament in 1720 to acknowledge
the bull, with express reservation, however, of the Gallican liberties,
and began a persecution of the Appellants. Under Louis XV. the
persecution became more severe, although in many ways moderated
by the influence of his former tutor, Cardinal Fleury. Noailles, who
died in 1729, was obliged in 1728 to submit unconditionally, and in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1730 the parliament formally ratified the bull. Amid daily
increasing oppression, many of the more faithful Jansenists, mostly
of the orders of St. Maur and the Oratory, fled to the Netherlands,
where they gave way more and more to fanaticism. In 1727 a young
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
Jansenist priest, Francis of Paris, died with the original text of the
appeal in his hands. His adherents honoured him as a saint, and
numerous reports of miracles, which had been wrought at his grave
in Medardus churchyard at Paris, made this a daily place of pilgrimage
to thousands of fanatics. The excited enthusiasts, who fell into
convulsions, and uttered prophecies about the overthrow of church
and state, grew in numbers and, with that mesmeric power which
fanaticism has been found in all ages to possess powerfully influenced
many who had been before careless and profane. One of these was
the member of parliament De Montgeron, who, from being a frivolous
scoffer, suddenly, in 1732, fell into violent convulsions, and in a three-volumed
work, <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>La Vérité des Miracles Opérés par l'Intercession de
François de Paris</foreign>,</q> 1737, came forward as a zealous apologist of the
party. The government, indeed, in 1732 ordered the churchyard to
be closed, but portions of earth from the grave of the saint continued
to effect convulsions and miracles. Thousands of convulsionists
throughout France were thrown into prison, and in 1752, Archbishop
Beaumont of Paris, with many other bishops, refused the last sacrament
to those who could not prove that they had accepted the constitution.
The grave of <q>St. Francis,</q> however, was the grave of
Jansenism, for fanatical excess contains the seeds of dissolution and
every manifestation of it hastens the catastrophe. Yet remnants of
the party lingered on in France till the outbreak of the Revolution,
of which they had prophesied.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>The Old Catholic Church in the Netherlands.</emph>&mdash;The first Jesuits
appeared in Holland in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1592. The form of piety fostered by
superior and inferior clergy in the Catholic church there, a heritage
from the times of the Brethren of the Common Life (§ 112, 9), was
directed to the deepening of Christian thought and feeling; and this,
as well as the liberal attitude of the Archbishop of Utrecht, awakened
the bitter opposition of the Jesuits. At the head of the local clergy
was Sasbold Vosmeer, vicar-general of the vacant archiepiscopal see
of Utrecht. Most energetically he set himself to thwart the Jesuit
machinations, which aimed at abolishing the Utrecht see and putting
the church of Holland under the jurisdiction of the papal nuncio at
Cologne. On the ground of suspicions of secret conspiracy Vosmeer
was banished. But his successors refused to be overruled or set aside
by the Jesuits. Meanwhile in France the first stage of the Jansenist
controversy had been passed through. The Dutch authorities had
heartily welcomed the condemned book of their pious and learned
countryman; but when the five propositions were denounced, they
agreed in repudiating them, without, however, admitting that they
had been taught in the sense objected to by Jansen. The Jesuits,
therefore, charged them with the Jansenist heresy, and issued in
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1697 an anonymous pamphlet full of lying insinuations about
the origin and progress of Jansenism in Holland. Its beginning was
traced back to a visit of Arnauld to Holland in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1681, and
its effects were seen in the circulation of prayer-books, tracts, and
sermons, urging diligent reading of Scripture, in the depreciation of
the worship of Mary, of indulgences, of images of saints and relics,
rosaries and scapularies (§ 188, 20), processions and fraternities, in
the rigoristic strictness of the confessional, the use of the common
language of the country in baptism, marriage, and extreme unction,
etc. The archbishop of that time, Peter Codde, in order to isolate
him, was decoyed to Rome, and there flattered with hypocritical
pretensions of goodwill, while behind his back his deposition was
carried out, and an apostolic vicar nominated for Utrecht in the
person of his deadly foe Theodore de Cock. But the chapter refused
him obedience, and the States of Holland forbad him to exercise
any official function, and under threat of banishment of all Jesuits
demanded the immediate return of the archbishop. Codde was now
sent down with the papal blessing, but a formal decree of deposition
followed him. Meanwhile the government pronounced on his rival
De Cock, who avoided a trial for high treason by flight, a sentence
of perpetual exile. But Codde, though persistently recognised by
his chapter as the rightful archbishop, withheld on conscientious
grounds from discharging official duties down to his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1710. Amid these disputes the Utrecht see remained vacant for
thirteen years. The flock were without a chief shepherd, the inferior
clergy without direction and support, the people were wrought upon
by Jesuit emissaries, and the vacant pastorates were filled by the
nuncio of Cologne. Thus it came about that of the 300,000 Catholics
remaining after the Reformation, only a few thousands continued
faithful to the national party, while the rest became bitter and
extreme ultramontanes, as the Catholic church of Holland still is.
Finally, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1723, the Utrecht chapter took courage and chose a
new archbishop in the person of Cornelius Steenowen. Receiving
no answer to their request for papal confirmation, the chapter, after
waiting a year and a half, had him and also his three successors
consecrated by a French missionary bishop, Varlet, who had been
driven away by the Jesuits. But in order to prevent the threatened
loss of legitimate consecration for future bishops after Varlet's death
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1742, a bishop elected at Utrecht was in that same year
ordained to the chapter of Haarlem, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1758 the newly
founded bishopric of Deventer was so supplied. All these, like all
subsequent elections, were duly reported to Rome, and a strictly
Catholic confession from electors and elected sent up; but each time,
instead of confirmation, a frightful ban was thundered forth. This,
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
however, did not deter the Dutch government from formally recognising
the elections.&mdash;Meanwhile the second and last act of the Jansenist
tragedy had been played in France. Many of the persecuted Appellants
sought refuge in Holland, and the welcome accorded them
seemed to justify the long cherished suspicion of Jansenism against
the people of Utrecht. They repelled these charges, however, by condemning
the five propositions and the heresies of Quesnel's book; but
they expressly refused the bull of Alexander VII. and its doctrine of
papal infallibility. This put a stop to all attempts at reconciliation.
The church of Utrecht meanwhile prospered. At a council held at
Utrecht in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1765 it styled itself <q>The Old Roman Catholic Church
of the Netherlands,</q> acknowledged the pope, although under his
anathema, as the visible head of the Christian church, accepted the
Tridentine decrees as their creed, and sent this with all the acts of
council to Rome as proof of their orthodoxy. The Jesuits did all in
their power to overturn the formidable impression which this at first
made there; and they were successful. Clement XIII. declared the
council null, and those who took part in it hardened sons of Belial.
But their church at this day contains, under one archbishop and two
bishops, twenty-six congregations, numbering 6,000 souls.<note place='foot'>Neale, <q>History of the so called Jansenist Church of Holland.</q>
Oxford, 1858.</note>&mdash;Continuation,
<ref target='Section_200_Para_3'>§ 200, 3</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>Suppression of the Order of Jesuits, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1773.</emph>&mdash;The Jesuits had
striven with growing eagerness and success after worldly power, and
instead of absolute devotion to the interests of the papacy, their chief
aim was now the erection of an independent political and hierarchical
dominion. Their love of rule had sustained its first check in the
overthrow of the Jesuit state of Paraguay; but they had secured a
great part of the world's trade (<ref target='Section_156_Para_13'>§ 156, 13</ref>), and strove successfully to
control European politics. The Jansenist controversy, however, had
called forth against them much popular odium; Pascal had made
them ridiculous to all men of culture, the other monkish orders were
hostile to them, their success in trade roused the jealousy of other
traders, and their interference in politics made enemies on every hand.
The Portuguese government took the first decided step. A revolt in
Paraguay and an attempt on the king's life were attributed to them
and the minister Pombal, whose reforms they had opposed, had them
banished from Portugal in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1759, and their goods confiscated.
<emph>Clement XIII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1758-1769, chosen by the Jesuits and under their
influence, protected them by a bull; but Portugal refused to let the
bull be proclaimed, led the papal nuncio over the frontier, broke off
all relations with Rome, and sent whole shiploads of Jesuits to the
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
pope. France followed Portugal's example when the general Ricci
had answered the king's demand for a reform of his orders: <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Sint ut
sunt, aut non sint</foreign>. For the enormous financial failure of the Jesuit La
Valette, the whole order was made responsible, and at last, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1764,
banished from France as dangerous to the state. Spain, Naples, and
Parma, too, soon seized all the Jesuits and transported them beyond
the frontiers. The new papal election on the death of Clement XIII.
was a life and death question with the Jesuits, but courtly influences
and fears of a schism prevailed. The pious and liberal Minorite
Ganganelli mounted the papal throne as <emph>Clement XIV.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1769-1774.
He began with sweeping administrative reforms, forbad the
reading of the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In cœna Domini</foreign> (§ 117, 3), and, pressed by the
Bourbon court, issued in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1773 the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dominus ac Redemtor Noster</foreign>
suppressing the Jesuit order. The order numbered 22,600 members
and the pope felt, in granting the bull, that he endangered his own
life. Next year he died, not without suspicion of poisoning. All the
Catholic courts, even Austria, put the decree in force. But the heretic
Frederick II. tolerated the order for a long time in Silesia, and
Catherine II. and Paul I. in their Polish provinces.&mdash;<emph>Pius VI.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1775-1799, in many respects the antithesis of his predecessor, was
the secret friend of the exiled and imprisoned ex-Jesuits. After
the outbreak of the French Revolution, a proposal was made at
Rome, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1792, for the formal restoration of the order, as a means
of saving the seriously imperilled church, but it did not find sufficient
encouragement.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_10'/>
10. <emph>Anti-hierarchical Movements in Germany and Italy.</emph>&mdash;Even before
Joseph II. could carry out his reforms in ecclesiastical polity, the
noble elector <emph>Maximilian Joseph III.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1745-1777, with greater
moderation but complete success, effected a similar reform in the
Jesuit-overrun Bavaria. Himself a strict Catholic, he asserted the
supremacy of the state over a foreign hierarchy, and by reforming
the churches, cloisters, and schools of his country he sought to
improve their position. But under his successor, Charles Theodore,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1777-1799, everything was restored to its old condition.&mdash;Meanwhile
a powerful voice was raised from the midst of the German
prelates that aimed a direct blow at the hierarchical papal system.
<emph>Nicholas von Hontheim</emph>, the suffragan Bishop of Treves, had under the
name <emph>Justinus Febronius</emph> published, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1763, a treatise <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De Statu
Ecclesiæ</foreign>, in which he maintained the supreme authority of general
councils and the independence of bishops in opposition to the hierarchical
pretensions of the popes. It was soon translated into German,
French, Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian. The book made a great impression,
and Clement XIII. could do nothing against the bold defender
of the liberties of the church. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1778, indeed, Pius VI. had the
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
poor satisfaction of extorting a recantation from the old man of
seventy-seven years, but he lived to see yet more deadly storms burst
upon the church. Urged by Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria, the
pope, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1785, had made Munich the residence of a nuncio. The
episcopal electors of Mainz, Cologne, and Treves, and the Archbishop
of Salzburg, seeing their archiepiscopal rights in danger, met in
congress at Ems in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1786, and there, on the basis of the Febronian
proofs, claimed, in the so called <emph>Punctation of Ems</emph>, practical independence
of the pope and the restoration of an independent German
national Catholic church. But the German bishops found it easier
to obey the distant pope than the near archbishops. So they united
their opposition with that of the pope, and the undertaking of the
archbishops came to nothing.&mdash;More threatening still for the existence
of the hierarchy was the reign of <emph>Joseph II.</emph> in Austria. German
emperor from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1765, and co-regent with his mother Maria Theresa,
he began, immediately on his succession to sole rule in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1780, a
radical reform of the whole ecclesiastical institutions throughout his
hereditary possessions. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1781 he issued his <emph>Edict of Toleration</emph>,
by which, under various restrictions, the Protestants obtained civil
rights and liberty of worship. Protestant places of worship were to
have no bells or towers, were to pay stole dues to the Catholic priests,
in mixed marriages the Catholic father had the right of educating
all his children and the Catholic mother could claim the education
at least of her daughters. By stopping all episcopal communications
with the papal curia, and putting all papal bulls and ecclesiastical
edicts under strict civil control, the Catholic church was emancipated
from Roman influences, set under a native clergy, and made serviceable
in the moral and religious training of the people, and all her
institutions that did not serve this end were abolished. Of the 2,000
cloisters, 606 succumbed before this decree, and those that remained
were completely sundered from all connexion with Rome. In vain
the bishops and Pius VI. protested. The pope even went to Vienna
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1782; but though received with great respect, he could make
nothing of the emperor. Joseph's procedure had been somewhat hasty
and inconsiderate, and a reaction set in, led by interested parties, on
the emperor's early death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1790.&mdash;The Grand-duke <emph>Leopold of
Tuscany</emph>, Joseph's brother, with the aid of the pious Bishop Scipio von
Ricci, inclined to Jansenism, sought also in a similar way to reform
the church of his land at the Synod of Pistoia, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1786. But here
too at last the hierarchy prevailed.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_11'/>
11. <emph>Theological Literature.</emph>&mdash;The Revocation of the Edict of Nantes,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1685, gave the deathblow to the French Reformed theology, but it
also robbed Catholic theology in <emph>France</emph> of its spur and incentive. The
Huguenot polemic against the papacy, and that of Jansenism against
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
the semi-pelagianism of the Catholic church, were silenced; but now
the most rabid naturalism, atheism, and materialism held the field
and the church theology was so lethargic that it could not attempt
any serious opposition. Yet even here some names are worthy of being
recorded. Above all, <emph>Bernard de Montfaucon</emph> of St. Maur, the ablest
antiquarian of France, besides his classical works, issued admirable
editions of Athanasius, Chrysostom, Origen's <q><foreign rend='italic'>Hexapla</foreign>,</q> and the
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collectio Nova Patrum</foreign>.</q> <emph>E. Renaudot</emph>, a learned expert in the oriental
languages, wrote several works in vindication of the <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Perpétuité de la
Foi cath.</foreign>,</q> a history of the Jacobite patriarchs of Alexandria, etc.,
and compiled a <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collectio liturgiarum Oriental</foreign>,</q> in two vols. Of permanent
worth is the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bibliotheca Sacra</foreign></q> of the Oratorian <emph>Le Long</emph>,
which forms an admirable literary-historical apparatus for the Bible.
The learned Jesuit <emph>Hardouin</emph>, who pronounced all Greek and Latin
classics, with few exceptions, to be monkish products of the thirteenth
century, and denied the existence of all pre-Tridentine general
councils, edited a careful collection of Acts of Councils in twelve vols.
folio in Paris, 1715, and compiled an elaborate chronology of the Old
Testament. His pupil, the Jesuit <emph>Berruyer</emph>, wrote a romancing <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Hist.
du Peuple de Dieu</foreign>,</q> which, though much criticised, was widely read.
Incomparably more important was the Benedictine <emph>Calmet</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1757, whose <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Dictionnaire de la Bible</foreign></q> and <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Commentaire Littéral et
Critique</foreign></q> on the whole Bible are really most creditable for their time.
And, finally, the Parisian professor of medicine, <emph>Jean Astruc</emph>, deserves
to be named as the founder of the modern Pentateuch criticism, whose
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Conjectures sur les Mémoires Originaux</foreign>,</q> etc., appeared in Brussels
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1753.&mdash;Within the limits of the French Revolution the noble
theosophist <emph>St. Martin</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1805, a warm admirer of Böhme,
wrote his brilliant and profound treatises.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_12'/>
12. <emph>In Italy</emph> the most important contributions were in the department
of history. <emph>Mansi</emph>, in his collection of Acts of Councils in thirty-one
vols. folio, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1759 ff., and <emph>Muratori</emph>, in his <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Scriptores Rer. Italic.</foreign>,</q>
in twenty-eight vols., and <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Antiquitt. Ital. Med. Ævi</foreign>,</q> in six vols., show
brilliant learning and admirable impartiality. <emph>Ugolino</emph>, in a gigantic
work, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Thesaurus Antiquitt. ss.</foreign>,</q> thirty-four folio vols., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1744 ff.,
gathers together all that is most important for biblical archæology.
The three <emph>Assemani</emph>, uncle and two nephews, cultured Maronites in
Rome, wrought in the hitherto unknown field of Syrian literature and
history. The uncle, Joseph Simon, librarian at the Vatican, wrote
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bibliotheca Orientalis</foreign>,</q> in four vols., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1719 ff., and edited Ephraem's
works in six vols. The elder nephew, Stephen Evodius, edited the <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Acta
ss. Martyrum Orient. et Occid.</foreign>,</q> in two vols., and the younger, Joseph
Aloysius, a <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Codex Liturgicus Eccles. Univ.</foreign>,</q> in thirteen vols. Among
dogmatical works the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Theologia hist.-dogm.-scholastica</foreign>,</q> in eight vols.
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
folio, Rome, 1739, of the Augustinian <emph>Berti</emph> deserves mention. <emph>Zaccaria</emph>
of Venice, in some thirty vols., proved an indefatigable opponent of
Febronianism, Josephinism, and such-like movements, and a careful
editor of older Catholic works. The Augustinian <emph>Florez</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1773, did for <emph>Spain</emph> what Muratori had done for Italy in making collections
of ancient writers, which, with the continuations of the
brethren of his order, extended to fifty folio volumes.&mdash;In <emph>Germany</emph>
the greatest Catholic theologian of the century was <emph>Amort</emph>. Of his
seventy treatises the most comprehensive is the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Theologia Eclectica,
Moralis et Scholastica</foreign>,</q> in four vols. folio, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1752. He conducted a
conciliatory polemic against the Protestants, contested the mysticism
of Maria von Agreda (<ref target='Section_156_Para_5'>§ 156, 5</ref>), and vigorously controverted superstition,
miracle-mongering, and all manner of monkish extravagances.
To the time of Joseph II. belongs the liberal, latitudinarian supernaturalist
<emph>Jahn</emph> of Vienna, whose <q>Introduction to the Old Testament,</q>
and <q>Biblical Antiquities</q> did much to raise the standard of biblical
learning. For his anti-clericalism he was deprived of his professorship
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1805, and died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1816 a canon in Vienna. To this century
also belongs the greatly blessed literary labours of the accomplished
mystic, <emph>Sailer</emph>, beginning at Ingolstadt in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1777, and continued at
Dillingen from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1784. Deprived in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1794 of his professorship
on pretence of his favouring the Illuminati, it was not till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1799
that he was allowed to resume his academic work in Ingolstadt and
Landshut. By numerous theological, ascetical, and philosophical
tracts, but far more powerfully by his lectures and personal intercourse,
he sowed the seeds of rationalism, which bore fruit in the
teachings of many Catholic universities, and produced in the hearts
of many pupils a warm and deep and at the same time a gentle and
conciliatory Catholicism, which heartily greeted, even in pious Protestants,
the foundations of a common faith and life. Compare <ref target='Section_187_Para_1'>§ 187,
1</ref>.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_191'>§ 191</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_13'/>
13. <emph>The German-Catholic Contribution to the Illumination.</emph>&mdash;The Catholic
church of Germany was also carried away with the current of <q>the
Illumination,</q> which from the middle of the century had overrun
Protestant Germany. While the exorcisms and cures of Father
Gassner in Regensburg were securing signal triumphs to Catholicism,
though these were of so dubious a kind that the bishops, the emperor,
and finally even the curia, found it necessary to check the course of
the miracle worker, <emph>Weishaupt</emph>, professor of canon law in Ingolstadt,
founded, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1776, the secret society of the <emph>Illuminati</emph>, which spread
its deistic ideas of culture and human perfectibility through Catholic
South Germany. Though inspired by deadly hatred of the Jesuits,
Weishaupt imitated their methods, and so excited the suspicion of
the Bavarian government, which, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1785, suppressed the order
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
and imprisoned and banished its leaders.&mdash;Catholic theology too was
affected by the rationalistic movement. But that the power of the
church to curse still survived was proved in the case of the Mainz
professor, <emph>Laurence Isenbiehl</emph>, who applied the passage about Immanuel,
in Isaiah vii. 14, not to the mother of Christ, but to the wife of the
prophet, for which he was deposed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1774, and on account of his
defective knowledge of theology was sent back for two years to the
seminary. When in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1778 he published a learned treatise on the
same theme, he was put in prison. The pope too condemned his
exposition as pestilential, and Isenbiehl <q>as a good Catholic</q> retracted.
<emph>Steinbühler</emph>, a young jurist of Salzburg, having been sentenced to
death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1781 for some contemptuous words about the Catholic
ceremonies, was pardoned, but soon after died from the ill-treatment
he had received. The rationalistic movement got hold more and more
of the Catholic universities. In Mainz, <emph>Dr. Blau</emph>, professor of dogmatics,
promulgated with impunity the doctrine that in the course of centuries
the church has often made mistakes. In the Austrian universities,
under the protection of the Josephine edict, a whole series of
Catholic theologians ventured to make cynically free criticisms, especially
in the field of church history. At Bonn University, founded in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1786 by the Elector-archbishop of Cologne, there were teachers
like <emph>Hedderich</emph>, who sportively described himself on the title page of
a dissertation as <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jam quater Romæ damnatus</foreign>,</q> <emph>Dereser</emph>, previously a
Carmelite monk, who followed Eichhorn in his exposition of the
biblical miracles, and <emph>Eulogius Schneider</emph>, who, after having made
Bonn too hot for him by his theological and poetical recklessness,
threw himself into the French Revolution, for two years marched
through Alsace with the guillotine as one of the most dreaded monsters,
and finally, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1794, was made to lay his own head on the block.&mdash;At
the Austrian universities, under the protection of the tolerant
Josephine legislation, a whole series of Catholic theologians, Royko,
Wolff, Dannenmayr, Michl, etc., criticised, often with cynical plainness,
the proceedings and condition of the Catholic church. To this
class also, in the first stage of his remarkably changeful and eventful
career, belongs Ign. Aur. <emph>Fessler</emph>. From 1773, a Capuchin in various
cloisters, last of all in Vienna, he brought down upon himself the
bitter hatred of his order by making secret reports to the emperor
about the ongoings that prevailed in these convents. He escaped their
enmity by his appointment, in 1784, as professor of the oriental
languages and the Old Testament at Lemberg, but was in 1787 dismissed
from this office on account of various charges against his life,
teaching, and poetical writings. In Silesia, in 1791, he went over
to the Protestant church, joined the freemasons, held at Berlin the
post of a councillor in ecclesiastical and educational affairs for the
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
newly won Catholic provinces of Poland, and, after losing this position
in consequence of the events of the war of 1806, found employment in
Russia in 1809; first, as professor of oriental languages at St. Petersburg,
and afterwards, when opposed and persecuted there also on
suspicion of entertaining atheistical views, as member of a legal
commission in South Russia. Meanwhile having gradually moved
from a deistical to a vague mystical standpoint, he was in 1819 made
superintendent and president of the evangelical consistory at Saratov,
with the title of an evangelical bishop, and after the abolition of that
office in 1833 he became general superintendent at St. Petersburg,
where he died in 1839. His romances and tragedies as well as his
theological and religious writings are now forgotten, but his <q>Reminiscences
of his Seventy Years' Pilgrimage,</q> published in 1824, are
still interesting, and his <q>History of Hungary,</q> in ten volumes,
begun in 1812, is of permanent value.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_14'/>
14. <emph>The French Contribution to the Illumination.</emph>&mdash;The age of Louis
XIV., with the morals of its Jesuit confessors, the lust, bigotry, and
hypocrisy of its court, its dragonnades and Bastille polemic against
revivals of a living Christianity among Huguenots, mystics, and
Jansenists, its prophets of the Cevennes and Jansenist convulsionists,
etc., called forth a spirit of freethinking to which Catholicism, Jansenism,
and Protestantism appeared equally ridiculous and absurd. This
movement was essentially different from English deism. The principle
of the English movement was <emph>common sense</emph>, the universal moral
consciousness in man, with the powerful weapon of rational criticism,
maintaining the existence of an ideal and moral element in men, and
holding by the more general principles of religion. French naturalism,
on the other hand, was a philosophy of the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>esprit</foreign>, that essentially
French lightheartedness which laughed away everything of an ideal
sort with scorn and wit. Yet there was an intimate relationship between
the two. The philosophy of common sense came to France, and was
there travestied into a philosophy <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>d'esprit</foreign>. The organ of this French
philosophy was the <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Encyclopédie</foreign></q> of Diderot and D'Alembert, and
its most brilliant contributors, Montesquieu, Helvetius, Voltaire, and
Rousseau. <emph>Montesquieu</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1689-1755, whose <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Esprit des Lois</foreign></q> in two
years passed through twenty-two editions, wrote the <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Lettres Persanes</foreign>,</q>
in which with biting wit he ridiculed the political, social, and ecclesiastical
condition of France. <emph>Helvetius</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1715-1771, had his book,
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>De l'Esprit</foreign>,</q> burnt in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1759 by order of parliament, and was
made to retract, but this only increased his influence. <emph>Voltaire</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1694-1778, although treating in his writings of philosophical and
theological matters, gives only a hash of English deism spiced with
frivolous wit, showing the same tendency in his historical and poetical
works, giving a certain eloquence to the commonest and filthiest subjects,
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
as in his <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Pucelle</foreign></q> and <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Candide</foreign>.</q> He obtained, however, an
immense influence that extended far past his own days. To the same
class belongs <emph>Jean Jacques Rousseau</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1712-1778, belonging to the
Roman Catholic church only as a pervert for seventeen years in the
middle of his life. Of a nobler nature than Voltaire, he yet often sank
into deep immorality, as he tells without reserve, but also without any
hearty penitence, in his <emph>Confessions</emph>. His whole life was taken up
with the conflict for his ideals of freedom, nature, human rights, and
human happiness. In his <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Contrat Social</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1762, he commends
a return to the natural condition of the savage as the ideal end of
man's endeavour. His <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Emile</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1761 is of epoch-making
importance in the history of education, and in it he eloquently sets
forth his ideal of a natural education of children, while he sent all his
own (natural) children to a foundling hospital.&mdash;The physician <emph>De la
Mettrie</emph>, who died at the court of Frederick the Great in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1751,
carried materialism to its most extreme consequences, and the German-Frenchman
Baron <emph>Holbach</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1723-1789, wrote the <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Système de la
Nature</foreign>,</q> which in two years passed through eighteen editions.<note place='foot'>Cairns, <q>Unbelief in the Eighteenth Century,</q> chap, iv., <q>Unbelief
in France.</q> Edinburgh, 1881. Morley, <q>Diderot and the
Encyclopedists.</q> 2 vols. London, 1878. Morley, <q>Voltaire.</q> London,
1872. Lange, <q>History of Materialism.</q> 3 vols. London, 1877.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_15'/>
15. These seeds bore fruit in the <emph>French Revolution</emph>. Voltaire's cry
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Écrasez l'infame</foreign>,</q> was directed against the church of the Inquisition,
the massacre of St. Bartholomew, and the dragonnades, and Diderot
had exclaimed that the world's salvation could only come when the
last king had been strangled with the entrails of the last priest. The
constitutional National Assembly, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1789-1791, wished to set aside,
not the faith of the people, but only the hierarchy, and to save the
state from a financial crisis by the goods of the church. All cloisters
were suppressed and their property sold. The number of bishops was
reduced to one half, all ecclesiastical offices without a pastoral sphere
were abolished, the clergy elected by the people paid by the state, and
liberty of belief recognised as an inalienable right of man. The legislative
National Assembly, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1791, 1792, made all the clergy take an
oath to the constitution on pain of deposition. The pope forbad it
under the same threat. Then arose a schism. Some 40,000 priests
who refused the oath mostly quitted the country. Avignon (§ 110, 4)
had been incorporated in the French territory. The terrorist National
Convention, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1792-1795, which brought the king to the scaffold on
January 21st, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1793, and the queen on October 16th, prohibited all
Christian customs, on 5th October abolished the Christian reckoning
of time, and on November 7th Christianity itself, laid waste 2,000
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
churches and converted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Notre Dame</foreign> into a <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Temple de la Raison</foreign>, where
a ballet-dancer represented the goddess of reason. Stirred up by the
fanatical baron, <q>Anacharsis</q> Cloots, <q>the apostle of human freedom
and the personal enemy of Jesus Christ,</q> the Archbishop Gobel, now
in his sixtieth year, came forward, proclaiming his whole past life a
fraud, and owning no other religion than that of freedom. On the other
hand, the noble Bishop Gregoire of Blois, the first priest to support the
constitution, who voted for the abolition of royalty, but not the execution
of the king, was not driven by the terrorism of the convention,
of which he was a member, from a bold and open profession of Christianity,
appearing in his clerical dress and unweariedly protesting
against the vandalism of the Assembly. Robespierre<note place='foot'>This saying is usually attributed to Voltaire. He used the expression
in attacking Pierre Bayle.&mdash;Erdmann's <q>Hist. of Phil.,</q> vol.
ii., p. 158. Ueberweg, <q>Hist. of Phil.,</q> vol. ii., p. 125.</note> himself said,
<q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Si Dieu n'existait pas, il faudrait l'inventer</foreign>,</q> passed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1794 the
resolution, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Le peuple français reconnait l'Être suprême et l'immortalité
de l'âme</foreign>, and issued an order to celebrate the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>fête de l'Être suprême</foreign>.
The Directory, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1795-1799, restored indeed Christian worship, but
favoured the deistical sect of the <emph>Theophilanthropists</emph>, whose high-swelling
phrases soon called forth public scorn, while in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1802 the
first consul banished their worship from all churches. But meanwhile,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1798, in order to nullify the opposition of the pope,
French armies had overrun Italy and proclaimed the Church States
a Roman Republic. <emph>Pius VI.</emph> was taken prisoner to France, and died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1799 at Valence under the rough treatment of the French, without
having in the least compromised himself or his office.<note place='foot'>Pressensé, <q>The Church and the Revolution.</q> London, 1869.
Jervis, <q>The Gallican Church and the Revolution.</q> London, 1882.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_16'/>
16. <emph>The Pseudo-Catholics.</emph>&mdash;(1) <emph>The Abrahamites or Bohemian Deists.</emph>
When Joseph II. issued his edict of toleration in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1781, a sect which
had hitherto kept itself secret under the mask of Catholicism made its
appearance in the Bohemian province of Pardubitz. The Abrahamites
were descended from the old Hussites, and professed to follow the faith
of Abraham before his circumcision. Their fundamental doctrine
was deistic monotheism, and of the Bible they accepted only the ten
commandments and the Lord's Prayer. But as they would neither
attend the Jewish synagogue nor the churches of any existing Christian
sect, the emperor refused them religious toleration, drove them
from their homes, and settled them in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1783 on the eastern frontiers.
Many of them, in consequence of persecution, returned to the
Catholic church, and even those who remained steadfast did not
transmit their faith to their children.
</p>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_165_Para_17'/>
17. (2) <emph>The Frankists.</emph>&mdash;Jacob Leibowicz, the son of a Jewish rabbi
in Galicia, attached himself in Turkey, where he assumed the name
of <emph>Frank</emph>, to the Jewish sect of the Sabbatarians, who, repudiating
the Talmud, adopted the cabbalistic book Sohar as the source of their
more profound religious teaching. Afterwards in Podolia, which was
then still Polish, he was esteemed among his numerous adherents as
a Messiah sent of God. Bitterly hated by the rabbinical Jews, and
accused of indulging in vile orgies in their assemblies, many of those
Soharists were thrown into prison at the instigation of Bishop
Dembowski of Kaminetz. But when they turned and accused their
opponents of most serious crimes against Christendom, and, at Frank's
suggestion, pointing out what they alleged to be an identity between
the book Sohar and the Christian doctrine of the Trinity and incarnation,
made it known that they were inclined to become converts, they
won the favour of the bishop. He arranged a disputation between the
two parties, pronounced the Talmudists beaten, confiscated all available
copies of the Talmud, dragged them through the streets tied to
the tail of a horse, and then burnt them. Dembowski, however, died
soon after in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1757, and the cathedral chapter expelled the Soharists
from Kaminetz. They appealed to King Augustus III. and to Archbishop
Lubienski of Lemberg, renewing their profession of faith in the
Trinity, and promising to be subject to the pope. In a disputation with
the Talmudists lasting three days they sought to prove that the
Talmudists used Christian blood in their services, which afterwards
led to the death of five of the Jews thus accused. By Frank's advice,
who took part neither in this nor in the former disputation, but was
the secret leader of the whole movement, they now formally applied
for admission into the Catholic church, and their leader now entered
Lemberg in great state. They actually submitted to be thus driven
by him, and 1,000 of his adherents were baptized at Lemberg. Frank
was baptized at Warsaw under the name of <emph>Joseph</emph>, the king himself
acting as sponsor. In all Catholic journals this event was celebrated
as a signal triumph for the Catholic church. But Frank among his
own disciples continued to play the <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> of a miracle-working Messiah.
Hence in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1760 the Inquisition stepped in. Some of his followers
were imprisoned, others banished, and he himself as a heresiarch condemned
to confinement for life with hard labour, from which after
thirteen years he was liberated on the first partition of Poland in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1772, through the favour of Catherine II., who employed him as secret
political agent. Feeling that his life was insecure in Poland, he went
to Moravia, and at Brünn reorganized his numerous and attached
followers into a well-knit society, by which he was revered as the
incarnation of the Deity, and his beautiful daughter Eva, brought up
by her noble godmother, as <q>the divine Emuna.</q> How he was permitted,
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
under the protection of the Catholic church, to continue here for
sixteen years, playing the <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> of a Messiah, and to amass such wealth
as enabled him to purchase, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1788, from the impoverished prince
of Homburg-Birstein his castle at Offenbach, with all the privileges
attached to it, is an insoluble mystery. He now called himself Baron
von Frank, formed with his followers from Moravia and Poland a
brilliant establishment, which outwardly adhered to the Roman
Catholic church, although he very seldom attended the Catholic services.
Frank died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1791, and was buried with great pomp, but
without the presence of the Catholic clergy. His daughter Eva was
able to maintain the extravagant establishment of her father for
twenty-six years, when the debt resting on the castle reached three
million florins. At last, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1817, the long-threatened catastrophe
occurred. Eva died suddenly, and a coffin said to contain her body
was actually with all decorum laid in the grave.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_166'/>
<head>§ 166. The Oriental Churches.</head>

<p>
The oppressed condition of the orthodox church in the
Ottoman empire continued unchanged. It had a more
vigorous development in Russia, where its ascendency was
unchallenged. Although the Russian church, from the
time of its obtaining an independent patriarchate at Moscow,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1589, was constitutionally emancipated from the
mother church of Constantinople, it yet continued in close
religious affinity with it. This was intensified by the adoption
of the common confession, drawn up shortly before by
Peter Mogilas (<ref target='Section_152_Para_3'>§ 152, 3</ref>). The patriarchal constitution in
Russia, however, was but short-lived, for Peter I., in 1702,
after the death of the Patriarch Hadrian, abolished the
patriarchate, arrogated to himself as emperor the highest
ecclesiastical office, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1721 constituted <q>the Holy
Synod,</q> to which, under the supervision of a procurator
guarding the rights of the state, he assigned the supreme
direction of spiritual and ecclesiastical affairs. To these
proposals the Patriarch of Constantinople gave his approval.
In this reform of the church constitution Theophanes Procopowicz,
Metropolitan of Novgorod, was the emperor's right
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
hand.&mdash;The monophysite church of Abyssinia was again
during this period the scene of Christological controversies.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_166_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Russian State Church.</emph>&mdash;From the time of the liturgical reformation
of the Patriarch Nikon (<ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>§ 163, 10</ref>) a new and peculiar service of
song took the place of the old unison style that had previously prevailed
in the Russian church. Without instrumental accompaniment,
it was sustained simply by powerful male voices, and was executed, at
least in the chief cities, with musical taste and charming simplicity.
Among the <emph>theologians</emph>, the above-named Procopowicz, who died in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1736, occupied a prominent position. His <q>Handbook of Dogmatics,</q>
without departing from the doctrines of his church, is
characterized by learning, clearness of exposition, and moderation.
From the middle of the century, however, especially among the
superior clergy, there crept in a Protestant tendency, which indeed
held quite firmly by the old theology of the œcumenical synods of
the Greek Church, but set aside or laid little stress upon later doctrinal
developments. Even the celebrated and widely used catechism,
drawn up originally for the use of the Grand-duke Paul Petrovich,
by his tutor, the learned Platón, afterwards Metropolitan of Moscow,
was not quite free from this tendency. It found yet more decided
expression in the dogmatic handbook of Theophylact, archimandrite
of Moscow, published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1773.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_206_Para_1'>§ 206, 1</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_166_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Russian Sects.</emph>&mdash;To the sects of the seventeenth century (<ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>§ 163, 10</ref>)
are to be added spiritualistic gnostics of the eighteenth, in which we find
a blending of western ideas with the old oriental mysticism. Among
those were the <emph>Malakanen</emph>, or consumers of milk, because, in spite of the
orthodox prohibition, they used milk during the fasts. They rejected
all anointings, even chrism and priestly consecration, and acknowledged
only spiritual anointing by the doctrine of Christ. They also volatilized
the idea of baptism and the Lord's supper into that of a merely
spiritual cleansing and nourishing by the word of the gospel. Otherwise
they led a quiet and honourable life. More important still in
regard to numbers and influence were the <emph>Duchoborzen</emph>. Although
belonging exclusively to the peasant class, they had a richly developed
theological system of a speculative character, with a notable blending
of theosophy, mysticism, Protestantism, and rationalism. They
idealized the doctrine of the sacraments after the style of the Quakers,
would have no special places of worship or an ordained clergy, refused
to take oaths or engage in military service, and led peaceable and
useful lives. They made their first appearance in Moscow in the
beginning of the eighteenth century under Peter the Great, and
spread through other cities of Old Russia.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_210_Para_3'>§ 210, 3</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_166_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Abyssinian Church</emph> (§§ 64, 1; 73, 2).&mdash;About the middle of
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
the century a monk appeared, proclaiming that, besides the commonly
admitted twofold birth of Christ, the eternal generation of the Father
and the temporal birth of the Virgin Mary, there was a third birth
through anointing with the Holy Spirit in the baptism in Jordan.
He thus convulsed the whole Abyssinian church, which for centuries
had been in a state of spiritual lethargy. The <foreign rend='italic'>abuna</foreign> with the
majority of his church held by the old doctrine, but the new also
found many adherents. The split thus occasioned has continued till
the present time, and has played no unimportant part in the politico-dynastic
struggles of the last ten years (<ref target='Section_184_Para_9'>§ 184, 9</ref>).
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Protestant Churches.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 167. The Lutheran Church before <q>the
Illumination.</q></head>

<p>
By means of the founding of the University of Halle in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1694 a fresh impulse was given to the pietist movement,
and too often the whole German Church was embroiled
in violent party strifes, in which both sides failed to keep
the happy mean, and laid themselves open to the reproach
of the adversaries. Spener died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1705, Francke in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1727, and Breithaupt in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1732. After the loss of
these leaders the Halle pietism became more and more
gross, narrow, unscientific, regardless of the Church confession,
frequently renouncing definite beliefs for hazy pious
feeling, and attaching undue importance to pious forms of
expression and methodistical modes of life. The conventionalism
encouraged by it became a very Pandora's box of
sectarianism and fanaticism (<ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>§ 170, 1</ref>). But it had also set
up a ferment in the church and in theology which created
a wholesome influence for many years. More than 6,000
theologians from all parts of Germany had down to Francke's
death received their theological training in Halle, and
carried the leaven of his spirit into as many churches and
schools. A whole series of distinguished teachers of
theology now rose in almost all the Lutheran churches of
the German states, who, avoiding the onesidedness of the
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
pietists and their opponents, taught and preached pure doctrine
and a pious life. From Calixt they had learnt to be
mild and fair towards the Reformed and Catholic churches,
and by Spener they had been roused to a genuine and hearty
piety. Gottfried Arnold's protest, onesided as it was, had
taught them to discover, even among heretics and sectaries,
partial and distorted truths; and from Calov and Löscher
they had inherited a zeal for pure doctrine. Most eminent
among these were Albert Bengel, of Württemberg, who
died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1752, and Chr. Aug. Crusius of Leipzig, who
died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1775. But when the flood of <q>the Illumination</q>
came rushing in upon the German Lutheran Church
about the middle of the century, it overflowed even the
fields sown by these noble men.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_167_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Pietist Controversies after the Founding of the Halle University</emph>
(<ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>§ 159, 3</ref>).&mdash;Pietism, condemned by the orthodox universities of
Leipzig and Wittenberg, was protected and encouraged in Halle.
The crowds of students flocking to this new seminary roused the
wrath of the orthodox. The Wittenberg faculty, with Deutschmann
at its head, issued a manifesto in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1695, charging Spener with no
less than 264 errors in doctrine. Nor were those of Leipzig silent,
Carpzov going so far as to style the mild and peace-loving Spener a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>procella ecclesiæ</foreign>. Other leading opponents of the pietists were Schelwig
of Dantzig, Mayer of Wittenberg, and Fecht of Rostock. When
Spener died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1705 his opponents gravely discussed whether he
could be thought of as in glory. Fecht of Rostock denied that it
could be. Among the later champions of pure doctrine the worthiest
and ablest was the learned Löscher, superintendent at Dresden, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1709-1747, who at least cannot be reproached with dead orthodoxy.
His <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vollständiger Timotheus Verinus</foreign>,</q> two vols., 1718, 1721, is by far
the most important controversial work against pietism.<note place='foot'>Hagenbach, <q>History of Church in the 18th and 19th Centuries,</q>
vol. i., pp. 109, 116. 2 vols. New York, 1869. Dorner, <q>History of
Protestant Theology,</q> vol. ii., p. 208.</note> Francis
Buddeus of Jena for a long time sought ineffectually to bring about a
reconciliation between Löscher and the pietists of Halle. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1710
Francke and Breithaupt obtained a valorous colleague in Joachim
Lange; but even he was no match for Löscher in controversy. Meanwhile
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
pietism had more and more permeated the life of the people,
and occasioned in many places violent popular tumults. In several
states conventicles were forbidden; in others, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Württemberg and
Denmark, they were allowed.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_167_Para_2'/>
2. The orthodox regarded the pietists as a new sect, with dangerous
errors that threatened the pure doctrine of the Lutheran Church;
while the pietists maintained that they held by pure Lutheran
orthodoxy, and only set aside its barren formalism and dead externalism
for biblical practical Christianity. The controversy gathered round
the doctrines of the new birth, justification, sanctification, the church,
and the millennium. (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) The new birth. The orthodox maintained
that regeneration takes place in baptism (§ 141, 13), every baptized
person is regenerate; but the new birth needs nursing, nourishment,
and growth, and, where these are wanting, reawakening. The pietists
identified awakening or conversion with regeneration, considered that
it was effected in later life through the word of God, mediated by a
corporeal and spiritual penitential struggle, and a consequent spiritual
experience, and sealed by a sensible assurance of God's favour in
the believer's blessed consciousness. This inward sealing marks the
beginning, introduction into the condition of babes in Christ. They
distinguished a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>theologia viatorum</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the symbolical church doctrine,
and a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>theologia regenitorum</foreign>, which has to do with the soul's inner
condition after the new birth. They have consequently been charged
with maintaining that a true Christian who has arrived at the stage of
spiritual manhood may and must in this life become free from sin.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>)
Justification and Sanctification. In opposition to an only too prevalent
externalizing of the doctrine of justification, Spener has taught
that only living faith justifies, and if genuine must be operative,
though not meritorious. Only in faith proved to be living by a pious
life and active Christianity, but not in faith in the external and
objective promises of God's word, lies the sure guarantee of justification
obtained. His opponents therefore accused him of confounding
justification and sanctification, and depreciating the former in favour
of the latter. And, though not by Spener, yet by many of his followers,
justification was put in the background, and in a onesided manner
stress was laid upon practical Christianity. Spener and Francke had
expressly preached against worldly dissipation and frivolity, and
condemned dancing, the theatre, card-playing, as detrimental to the
progress of sanctification, and therefore sinful; while the orthodox
regarded them as matters of indifference. Besides this, the pietists
held the doctrine of a day of grace, assigned to each one within the
limit of his earthly life (<emph>terminism</emph>).&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) The Church and the Pastorate.
Orthodoxy regarded word and sacrament and the ministry which
administered them as the basis and foundation of the church; pietism
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
held that the individual believers determined the character and existence
of the church. In the one case the church was thought to beget,
nurse, and nourish believers; in the other believers, constituted, maintained,
and renewed the church, accomplishing this best by conventicles,
in which living Christianity preserved itself and diffused its influence
abroad. The orthodox laid great stress upon clerical ordination and
the grace of office; pietists on the person and his faith. Spener had
taught that only he who has experienced in his own heart the power
of the gospel, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> he who has been born again, can be a true preacher
and pastor. Löscher maintained that the official acts of an unconverted
preacher, if only he be orthodox, may be blessed as well as
those of a converted man, because saving power lies not in the person
of the preacher, but in the word of God which he preaches, in its
purity and simplicity, and in the sacraments which he dispenses in
accordance with their institution. The pietists then went so far as
absolutely to deny that saving results could follow the preaching of
an unconverted man. The proclamation of forgiveness by the church
without the inward sealing had for them no meaning; yea, they
regarded it as dangerous, because it quieted conscience and made
sinners secure. Hence they keenly opposed private confession and
churchly absolution. Of a special grace of office they would know
nothing: the true ordination is the new birth; each regenerate one,
and such a one only, is a true priest. The orthodox insisted above all
on pure doctrine and the church confession; the pietists too regarded
this as necessary, but not as the main thing. Spener decidedly
maintained the duty of accepting the church symbols; but later pietists
rejected them as man's work, and so containing errors. Among
the orthodox, again, some went so far as to claim for their symbols
absolute immunity from error. Spener's opposition to the compulsory
use of fixed Scripture portions, prescribed forms of prayer, and the
exorcism formulary occasioned the most violent contentions. On
the other hand, his reintroduction of the confirmation service before
the first communion, which had fallen into general desuetude, was
imitated, and soon widely prevailed, even among the orthodox.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>d</hi>)
Eschatology. Spener had interpreted the biblical doctrine of the 1,000
years' reign as meaning that, after the overthrow of the papacy and
the conversion of heathens and Jews, a period of the most glorious
and undisturbed tranquillity would dawn for the kingdom of Christ
on earth as prelude to the eternal sabbath. His opponents denounced
this as chiliasm and fanaticism.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>e</hi>) There was, finally, a controversy
about Divine providence occasioned by the founding of Francke's
orphan house at Halle. The pietists pointed to the establishment and
growth of this institution as an instance of immediate divine providence;
while Löscher, by indicating the common means employed to
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
secure success, reduced the whole affair to the domain of general and
daily providence, without denying the value of the strong faith in
God and the active love that characterized its founder, as well as the
importance of the Divine blessing which rested upon the work.<note place='foot'>Dorner, <q>History of Protestant Theology,</q> vol. ii., pp. 208-227.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_167_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Theology</emph> (<ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>§ 159, 4</ref>).&mdash;The last two important representatives of
the <emph>Old Orthodox School</emph> were <emph>Löscher</emph>, who, besides his polemic against
pietism, made learned contributions to biblical philology and church
history; and his companion in arms, <emph>Cyprian</emph> of Gotha, who died in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1745, the ablest combatant of Arnold's <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Ketzerhistorie</foreign>,</q> and
opponent of union efforts and of the papacy.&mdash;The <emph>Pietist School</emph>, more
fruitful in practical than scientific theology, contributed to devotional
literature many works that will never be forgotten. The learned and
voluminous writer <emph>Joachim Lange</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1744, the most skilful
controversialist among the Halle pietists, author of the <q>Halle Latin
Grammar,</q> which reached its sixtieth edition in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1809, published a
commentary on the whole Bible in seven folio vols. after the Cocceian
method. Of importance as a historian of the Reformation was <emph>Salig</emph>
of Wolfenbüttel, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1738. <emph>Christian Thomasins</emph> at first
attached himself to the pietists as an opponent of the rigid adherence
to the letter of the orthodox, but was repudiated by them as an
indifferentist. To him belongs the honour of having turned public
opinion against the persecution of witches (§ 117, 4). Out of the
contentions of pietists and orthodox there now rose a <emph>third school</emph>,
in which Lutheran theology and learning were united with genuine
piety and profound thinking, decided confessionalism with moderation
and fairness. Its most distinguished representatives were <emph>Hollaz</emph>
of Pomerania, died 1713 (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Examen Theologicum Acroamaticum</foreign></q>);
<emph>Buddeus</emph> of Jena, died 1729 (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hist. Ecclst. V.T.</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Instit. Theol.
Dogma</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Isagoge Hist. Theol. Univ.</foreign></q>); <emph>J. Chr. Wolf</emph> of Homburg,
died 1739 (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Biblioth. Hebr.</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Curæ Philol. et Crit. in N.T.</foreign></q>); <emph>Weismann</emph>
of Tübingen, died 1747 (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hist. Ecclst.</foreign></q>); <emph>Carpzov</emph> of Leipzig,
died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1767 as superintendent at Lübeck (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Critica s. V.T.</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign rend='italic'>Introductio
ad Libros cen. V.T.</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign rend='italic'>Apparatus Antiquitt. s. Codicis</foreign></q>); <emph>J. H.
Michaelis</emph> of Halle, died 1731 (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Biblia. Hebr. c. Variis Lectionibus et
Brev. Annott.</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Uberiores Annott. in Hagiograph.</foreign></q>); assisted in both
by his learned nephew <emph>Chr. Ben. Michaelis</emph> of Halle, died 1764; <emph>J. G.
Walch</emph> of Jena, died 1755 (<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Einl. in die Religionsstreitigkeiten</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign rend='italic'>Biblioth.
Theol. Selecta</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Biblioth. Patristica</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Luther's Werke</foreign></q>); <emph>Chr. Meth.
Pfaff</emph> of Tübingen, died 1760 (<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>K. G., K. Recht, Dogmatik, Moral</foreign></q>);
<emph>L. von Mosheim</emph> of Helmstädt and Göttingen, died 1755, the father of
modern church history (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Institt. Hist. Ecclst.</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign rend='italic'>Commentarii Rebus
Christ. ante Constant. M.</foreign>,</q> <q><foreign rend='italic'>Dissertationes</foreign>,</q> etc.); <emph>J. Alb. Bengel</emph> of
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
Stuttgart, died 1752 (<q><foreign rend='italic'>Gnomon N.T.</foreign>,</q> a commentary on the N.T.
distinguished by pregnancy of expression and profundity of thought;
from his interpretation of Revelation he expected the millennium to
begin in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1836); and <emph>Chr. A. Crusius</emph> of Leipzig, died 1775 (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hypomnemata
ad Theol. Propheticam.</foreign></q>)&mdash;A <emph>fourth</emph> theological school arose
out of the application of the mathematical method of demonstration
by the philosopher <emph>Chr. von Wolff</emph> of Halle, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1754. Wolff
attached himself to the philosophical system of Leibnitz, and sought
to unite philosophy and Christianity; but under the manipulation of
his logico-mathematical method of proof he took all vitality out of
the system, and the pre-established harmony of the world became a
purely mechanical clockwork. He looked merely to the logical accuracy
of Christian truths, without seeking to penetrate their inner
meaning, gave formal exercise to the understanding, while the heart
was left empty and cold; and thus inevitably revelation and mystery
made way for a mere natural theology. Hence the charge brought
against the system of tending to fatalism and atheism, not only by
narrow pietists like Lange, but by able and liberal theologians like
Buddeus and Crusius, was quite justifiable. By a cabinet order of
Frederick William I. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1723 Wolff was deposed, and ordered
within two days, on pain of death, to quit the Prussian states. But
so soon as Frederick II. ascended the throne, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1740, he recalled
the philosopher to Halle from Marburg, where he had meanwhile
taught with great success.<note place='foot'>Dorner, <q>History of Protestant Theology,</q> vol. ii., pp. 266-279.
Hagenbach, <q>History of Church in 18th and 19th Centuries,</q> vol. i.,
pp. 117-127.</note> <emph>Sig. Jac. Baumgarten</emph>, the pious and
learned professor in Halle, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1757, was the first to
introduce Wolff's method into theology. In respect of contents his
theology occupies essentially the old orthodox ground. The ablest
promoter of the system was <emph>John Carpov</emph> of Weimar, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1768 (<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Theol. Revelata Meth. Scientifica Adornata</foreign></q>). When applied
to sermons, the Wolffian method led to the most extreme insipidity
and absurdity.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_167_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Unionist Efforts.</emph>&mdash;The distinguished theologian Chr. Matt. Pfaff,
chancellor of the University of Tübingen, who, without being numbered
among the pietists, recognised in pietism a wholesome reaction
against the barren worship of the letter which had characterized
orthodoxy, regarded a union between the Lutheran and Reformed
churches on their common beliefs, which in importance far exceeded
the points of difference, as both practicable and desirable; and in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1720 expressed this opinion in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Alloquium Irenicum ad Protestantes</foreign>,</q>
in which he answered the challenge of the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Corpus Evangelicorum</foreign></q>
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
at Regensburg (<ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>§ 153, 1</ref>). His proposal, however, found little
favour among Lutheran theologians. Not only Cyprian of Gotha,
but even such conciliatory theologians as Weismann of Tübingen and
Mosheim of Helmstädt, opposed it. But forty years later a Lutheran
theologian, Heumann of Göttingen, demonstrated that <q>the Reformed
doctrine of the supper is true,</q> and proposed, in order to end the
schism, that Lutherans should drop their doctrine of the supper and
the Reformed their doctrine of predestination. This pamphlet, edited
after the author's death by Sack of Berlin, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1764, produced a
great sensation, and called forth a multitude of replies on the Lutheran
side, the best of which were those of Walch of Jena and Ernesti of
Leipzig. Even within the Lutheran church, however, it found considerable
favour.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_167_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Theories of Ecclesiastical Law.</emph>&mdash;Of necessity during the first century
of the Protestant church its government was placed in the hands
of the princes, who, because there were no others to do so, dispensed the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jura episcopalia</foreign> as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>præcipua membra ecclesiæ</foreign>. What was allowed at first
in the exigency of these times came gradually to be regarded as a legal
right. Orthodox theology and the juristic system associated with it,
especially that of Carpzov, justified this assumption in what is called
the <emph>episcopal system</emph>. This theory firmly maintains the mediæval distinction
between the spiritual and civil powers as two independent
spheres ordained of God; but it installs the prince as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>summus episcopus</foreign>,
combining in his person the highest spiritual with the highest
civil authority. In lands, however, where more than one confession
held sway, or where a prince belonging to a different section of the
church succeeded, the practical difficulties of this theory became
very apparent; as, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, when a Reformed or Romish prince had to be
regarded as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>summus episcopus</foreign> of a Lutheran church. Driven thus to
seek another basis for the claims of royal supremacy, a new theory,
that of the <emph>territorial system</emph>, was devised, according to which the
prince possessed highest ecclesiastical authority, not as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>præcipuum
membrum ecclesiæ</foreign>, but as sovereign ruler in the state. The headship
of the church was therefore not an independent prerogative over and
above that of civil government, but an inherent element in it: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cujus
regio, illius et religio</foreign>. The historical development of the German
Reformation gave support to this theory (§ 126, 6), as seen in the
proceedings of the Diet of Spires in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1526, in the Augsburg and
Westphalian Peace. A scientific basis was given it by Puffendorf of
Heidelberg, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1694, in alliance with Hobbes (<ref target='Section_163_Para_3'>§ 163, 3</ref>). It was
further developed and applied by Christian Thomasius of Halle, died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1728, and by the famous J. H. Böhmer in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Jus Ecclesiasticum
Protestantium</foreign>.</q> Thomasius' connexion with the pietists and his indifference
to confessions secured for the theory a favourable reception
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
in that party. Spener himself indeed preferred the Calvinistic
presbyterial constitution, because only in it could equality be given
to all the three orders, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ministerium ecclesiasticum</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>magistratus politicus</foreign>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status œconomicus</foreign>. This protest by Spener against the two systems
was certainly not without influence upon the construction of a third
theory, the <emph>collegial system</emph>, proposed by Pfaff of Tübingen, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1760. According to this scheme there belonged to the sovereign as such
only the headship of the church, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jus circa sacra</foreign>, while the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jura in
sacra</foreign>, matters pertaining to doctrine, worship, ecclesiastical law and
its administration, installation of clergy, and excommunication, as
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jura collegialia</foreign>, belonged to the whole body of church members. The
normal constitution therefore required the collective vote of all the
members through their synods. But outward circumstances during
the Reformation age had necessitated the relegating the discharge of
these collegial rights to the princes, which in itself was not unallowable,
if only the position be maintained that the prince acts <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex
commisso</foreign>, and is under obligation to render an account to those who
have commissioned him. This system, on account of its democratic
character, found hearty supporters among the later rationalists. But
as a matter of fact nowhere was any of the three systems consistently
carried out. The constitution adopted in most of the national
churches was a weak vacillation between all the three.<note place='foot'>Dorner, <q>History of Protestant Theology,</q> vol. ii., pp. 259-261.
Geffcken, <q>Church and State,</q> 2 vols. Lon., 1887, vol. i., pp. 456-503.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_167_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Church Song</emph> (<ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>§ 159, 3</ref>) received, during the first half of the century,
many valuable contributions. Two main groups of singers
may be distinguished: (1) The pietistic school, characterized by a
biblical and practical tendency. The spiritual life of believers, the
work of grace in conversion, growth in holiness, the varying conditions
and experiences of the religious life, were favourite themes.
They were fitted, not so much for use in the public services, as for
private devotion, and few comparatively have been retained in collections
of church hymns. The later productions of this school sank
more and more into sentimentalism and allegorical and fanciful play
of words. We may distinguish among the Halle pietists an older
school, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1690-1720, and a younger, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1720-1750. The former,
coloured by the fervent piety of Francke, produced simple, hearty, and
often profound songs. The most distinguished representatives were
<emph>Freylinghausen</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1739, Francke's son-in-law, and director of
the Halle Orphanage, editor in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1717 of a hymn-book widely used
among the pietists, was author of the hymns <q>Pure Essence, spotless
Fount of Light,</q> <q>The day expires</q>; <emph>Chr. Fr. Richter</emph>, physician to
the Orphanage, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1711, author of thirty-three beautiful hymns,
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
including <q>God, whom I as Love have known</q>; <emph>Emilia Juliana</emph>,
Countess of Schwarzburg Rudolstadt, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1706, who wrote 586
hymns, including <q>Who knows how near my end may be?</q> <emph>Schröder</emph>,
pastor in Magdeburg, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1728, wrote <q>One thing is needful: Let
me deem</q>; <emph>Winckler</emph>, cathedral preacher of Magdeburg, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1722,
author of <q>Strive, when thou art called of God</q>; <emph>Dessler</emph>, rector of
Nuremburg, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1722, composer of <q>I will not let Thee go, Thou
help in time of need,</q> <q>O Friend of souls, how well is me;</q> <emph>Gotter</emph>, died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1735, who wrote, <q>O Cross, we hail thy bitter reign</q>; <emph>Cresselius</emph>,
pastor in Dusseldorf, author of <q>Awake, O man, and from thee shake.</q>
The younger Halle school represents pietism in its period of decay.
Its best representatives are <emph>J. J. Rambach</emph>, professor at Giessen, died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1735, who wrote <q>I am baptized into thy name</q>; <emph>Allendorf</emph>, court
preacher at Cöthen, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1773, editor of a collection of poetic
renderings from the Canticles.&mdash;(2) The poets of the orthodox party,
although opposed to the pietists, are all more or less touched by the
fervent piety of Spener. <emph>Neumeister</emph>, pastor at Hamburg, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1756,
was an orthodox hymn-writer of thoroughly conservative tendencies,
zealously opposing the onesidedness of pietism, with a strong, ardent
faith in the orthodox creed, but without much significance as a poet.
<emph>Schmolck</emph>, pastor at Schweidnitz, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1737, wrote over 1,000 hymns,
including <q>Blessed Jesus, here we stand,</q> <q>Hosanna to the Son of
David! Raise,</q> <q>Welcome, thou Victor in the strife.</q> <emph>Sol. Franck</emph>,
secretary to the consistory at Weimar, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1725, wrote over 300
hymns, including <q>Rest of the weary, thou thyself art resting now.</q>
The mediating party between pietism and orthodoxy, represented by
Bengel and Crusius in theology, is represented among hymn-writers
by <emph>J. Andr. Rothe</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1758, and by <emph>Mentzer</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1784, composer
of <q>Oh, would I had a thousand tongues!</q> In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750 J. Jac.
von Moser collected a list of 50,000 spiritual songs printed in the
German language.&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>§ 171, 1</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_167_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Sacred Music (<ref target='Section_159_Para_5'>§ 159, 5</ref>).</emph>&mdash;Decadence of musical taste accompanied
the lowering of the poetic standard, and pietists went even further
than the orthodox in their imitation and adaptation of operatic airs.
<emph>Freylinghausen</emph>, not only himself composed many such melodies, but
made a collection from various sources in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1704, retaining some of
the more popular of the older tunes.&mdash;There now arose, amid all this
depravation of taste, a noble musician, who, like the good householder,
could bring out of his treasure things new and old. <emph>J. Seb. Bach</emph>, the
most perfect organist who ever lived, was musical director of the School
of St. Thomas, Leipzig, and died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750. He turned enthusiastically
to the old chorale, which no one had ever understood and appreciated
as he did. He harmonized the old chorales for the organ, made them
the basis for elaborate organ studies, gave expression to his profoundest
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
feelings in his musical compositions and in his recitatives, duets, and
airs, reproduced at the sacred concerts many fine old chorales wedded
to most appropriate Scripture passages. He is for all times the unrivalled
master in fugue, harmony, and modulation. In his passion
music we have expression given to the profoundest ideas of German
Protestantism in the noblest music. After Bach comes a master in
oratorio music hitherto unapproached, <emph>G. Fr. Handel</emph> of Halle, who,
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1710 till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1759, lived mostly in England.
For twenty-five years he wrought for the opera-house, and only in his
later years gave himself to the composing of oratorios. His operas
are forgotten, but his oratorios will endure to the end of time. His
most perfect work is the <q>Messiah,</q> which Herder describes as a
Christian epic in music. Of his other great compositions, <q>Samson,</q>
<q>Judas Maccabæus,</q> and <q>Jephtha</q> may be mentioned.<note place='foot'>Burney, <q>Life of Handel.</q> London, 1784.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_167_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>The Christian Life and Devotional Literature.</emph>&mdash;Pietism led to a
powerful revival of religious life among the people, which it sustained
by zealous preaching and the publication of devotional works. A
similar activity displayed itself among the orthodox. Francke began
his charitable labours with seven florins; but with undaunted faith he
started his Orphanage, writing over its door the words of Isaiah xl.
31. In faith and benevolence Woltersdorff was a worthy successor
of Francke; and Baron von Canstein applied his whole means to the
founding of the Bible Institute of Halle. Missions too were now prosecuted
with a zeal and success which witnessed to the new life that
had arisen in the Lutheran church.&mdash;A remarkable manifestation of
the pietistic spirit of this age is seen in <emph>The Praying Children in Silesia</emph>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1707. Children of four years old and upward gathered in open
fields for singing and prayer, and called for the restoration of
churches taken away by the Catholics. The movement spread over
the whole land. In vain was it denounced from the pulpits and
forbidden by the authorities. Opposition only excited more and more
the zeal of the children. At last the churches were opened for their
services. The excitement then gradually subsided. It was, however,
long a subject of discussion between the pietists and the orthodox;
the latter denouncing it as the work of the devil, the former regarding
it as a wonderful awakening of God's grace.&mdash;Best remembered of
the many devotional writers of this period are Bogatsky of Halle, died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1774, whose <q>Golden Treasury</q> is still highly esteemed;<note place='foot'>Kelly, <q>Life and Work of Von Bogatsky: a Chapter from the
Religious Life of the Eighteenth Century.</q> London, 1889.</note> and Von
Moser, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1785, who lived a noble and exemplary life at Stuttgart
amid much sore persecution. The great need of simple explanation
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
of Scripture appears from the great sale of such popular commentaries
as those of Pfaff at Tübingen, 1730, Starke at Leipzig, 1741, and the
Halle Bible of S. J. Baumgarten, 1748.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_167_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>Missions to the Heathen.</emph>&mdash;The quickening of religious life by
pietism bore fruit in new missionary activity. Frederick IV. of
Denmark founded in his East Indian possessions the Tranquebar
mission in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1706, under Ziegenbalg and Plutschau. Ziegenbalg,
who translated the New Testament into Tamil, died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1719.
From the Danish possessions this mission carried its work over into
the English Indian territories. Able and zealous workers were sent out
from the Halle Institute, of whom the greatest was Chr. Fr. Schwartz,
who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1798, after nearly fifty years of noble service in the
mission field. In the last quarter of the century, however, under the
influence of rationalism, zeal for missions declined, the Halle society
broke up, and the English were allowed to reap the harvest sown by
the Lutherans. The Halle professor Callenberg founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1728 a
society for the conversion of the Jews, in the interests of which Stephen
Schultz travelled over Europe, Asia, and Africa, preaching the Cross
among the Jews. Christianity had been introduced among the
Eskimos in Greenland in the eleventh century (§ 93, 5), but the Scandinavian
colony there had been forgotten, and no trace of the religion
which it had taught any longer remained. This reproach to Christianity
lay sore on the heart of Hans Egede, a Norwegian pastor, and
he found no rest till, supported by a Danish-Norwegian trading house,
he sailed with his family in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1721 for these frozen and inhospitable
shores. Amid almost inconceivable hardships, and with at first but
little success, he continued to labour unweariedly, and even after the
trading company abandoned the field he remained. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1733 he had
the unexpected joy of welcoming three Moravian missionaries, Christian
David and the brothers Stach. His joy was too soon dashed by the
spiritual pride of the new arrivals, who insisted on modelling everything
after their own Moravian principles, and separated themselves
from the noble Egede, when he refused to yield, as an unspiritual and
unconverted man. Egede, on the other hand, though deeply offended
at their confounding justification and sanctification, their contempt
of pure doctrine, and their unscriptural views and mode of speech, was
ready to attribute all this to their defective theological training. He
rewarded their unkindness, when they were stricken down in sore
sickness, with unwearied, loving care. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1736 he returned to
Denmark, leaving his son Paul to carry on his work, and continued
director of the Greenland Mission Seminary in Copenhagen till his
death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1758.<note place='foot'>Hough, <q>The History of Christianity in India.</q> 5 vols. London,
1839. Sherring, <q>History of Missions in India,</q> edited by Storrow.
London, 1888. Pearson, <q>Memoirs, Life, and Correspondence of Chr.
Fr. Schwartz,</q> etc. 2 vols. London, 1834.</note>&mdash;Continuation, <ref target='Section_171_Para_5'>§ 171, 5</ref>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_168'/>
<head>§ 168. The Church of the Moravian Brethren.<note place='foot'>Hagenbach, <q>History of the Christian Church in the 18th and 19th
Centuries,</q> New York, 1869; Lectures XVIII. and XIX., pp. 398-445.</note></head>

<p>
The highly gifted Count Zinzendorf, inspired even as a boy,
out of fervent love to the Saviour, with the idea of gathering
together the lovers of Jesus, took occasion of the visit of
some Moravian Exultants to his estate to realize his cherished
project. On the Hutberg he dropped the mustard seed of
the dream of his youth into fertile soil, where, under his
fervent care, it soon grew into a stately tree, whose branches
spread over all European lands, and thence through all parts
of the habitable globe. The society which he founded was
called <q>The Society of the United Brethren.</q> The fact that
this society was not overwhelmed by the extravagances to
which for a time it gave way, that its fraternising with the
fanatics, the extravagant talk in which its members indulged
about a special covenant with the Saviour, and their not
over-modest claims to a peculiar rank in the kingdom of God,
did not lead to its utter overthrow in the abyss of fanaticism,
and that on the slippery paths of its mystical marriage
theory it was able to keep its feet, presents a phenomenon,
which stands alone in church history, and more than anything
else proves how deeply rooted founder and followers were
in the saving truths of the gospel. The count himself laid
aside many of his extravagances, and what still remained
was abandoned by his sensible and prudent successor Spangenberg,
so far as it was not necessarily involved in the
fundamental idea of a special covenant with the Saviour.
The special service rendered by the society was the protest
which it raised against the generally prevailing apostasy.
During this period of declension it saved the faith of many
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
pious souls, affording them a welcome refuge, with rich spiritual
nourishment and nurture. With the reawakening of
the religious life in the nineteenth century, however, its adherents
lost ground in Europe more and more, by maintaining
their old onesidedness in life and doctrine, their depreciatory
estimate of theological science, and the quarrelsome spirit
which they generally manifested. But in one province, that
of missions to the heathen, their energy and success have
never yet been equalled. Their thorough and well-organized
system of education also deserves particular mention. At
present the Society of the Brethren numbers half a million,
distributed among 100 settlements or thereabout.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_168_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Founder of the Moravian Brotherhood</emph>, Nic. Ludwig Count von
<emph>Zinzendorf</emph> and Pottendorf, was born in Dresden in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1700. Spener
was one of his sponsors at baptism. His father dying early, and
his mother marrying a second time, the boy, richly endowed with
gifts of head and heart, was brought up by his godly pietistic grandmother,
the Baroness von Gersdorf. There in his earliest youth he
learned to seek his happiness in the closest personal fellowship with
the Lord, and the tendency of his whole future life to yield to the
impulses of pious feeling already began to assert itself. In his tenth
year he entered the Halle Institute under Francke, where the pietistic
idea of the need of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ecclesiolæ in ecclesia</foreign> took firm possession of
his heart. Even in his fifteenth year he sought its realization by
founding among his fellow students <q>The Order of the Grain of
Mustard Seed</q> (Matt. xiii. 31). After completing his school course,
his uncle and guardian, in order to put an end to his pietistic extravagances,
sent him to study law at the orthodox University of Wittenberg.
Here he had at first to suffer a sort of martyrdom as a rigid
pietist swimming against the orthodox current. His residence at
Wittenberg, however, was beneficial to him in freeing him unconsciously
of the Halle pietism, which had restrained his spiritual
development. He did indeed firmly maintain the fundamental idea
of pietism, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ecclesiolæ in ecclesia</foreign>, but in his mind it gained a wider
significance than pietism had given it. His endeavours to secure a
personal conference, and where possible a union, between the Halle and
Wittenberg leaders were unsuccessful. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1719 he left Wittenberg
and travelled for two years, visiting the most distinguished representatives
of all confessions and sects. This too fostered his idea of a
grand gathering of all who love the Lord Jesus. On his return home,
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1721, at the wish of his relatives he entered the service of
the Saxon government. But a religious genius like Zinzendorf could
find no satisfaction in such employment. And soon an opportunity
presented itself for carrying out the plan to which his thoughts and
longings were directed.<note place='foot'>Spangenberg, <q>Life of Count Zinzendorf.</q> London, 1838.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_168_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Founding of the Brotherhood</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1722-1727. The Schmalcald,
and still more the Thirty Years' War, had brought frightful suffering
and persecution upon the Bohemian and Moravian Brethren. Many
of them sought refuge in Poland and Prussia. One of the refugees
was the famous educationist J. Amos Comenius, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1671, after having been bishop of the Moravians at Lissa in Posen
from 1648. Those who remained behind were, even after the Peace of
Westphalia, subjected to the cruellest oppression! Only secretly in
their houses and at the risk of their lives could they worship God
according to the faith of their fathers; and they were obliged publicly
to profess their adherence to the Romish church. Thus gradually
the light of the gospel was extinguished in the homes of their
descendants, and only a tradition, becoming ever more and more faint,
remained as a memory of their ancestral faith. A Moravian carpenter,
Christian David, born and reared in the Romish church, but converted
by evangelical preaching, succeeded in the beginning of the eighteenth
century in fanning into a flame again in some families the light that
had been quenched. This little band of believers, under David's
leading, went forth in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1722 and sought refuge on Zinzendorf's
estate in Lusatia. The count was then absent, but the steward, with
the hearty concurrence of the count's grandmother, gave them the
Hutberg at Berthelsdorf as a settlement. With the words of Psalm
lxxxiv. 4 on his lips, Christian David struck the axe into the tree
for building the first house. Soon the little town of Herrnhut had
arisen, as the centre of that Christian society which Zinzendorf now
sought with all his heart and strength to develop and promote.
Gradually other Moravians dropped in, but a yet greater number
from far and near streamed in, of all sorts of religious revivalists,
pietists, separatists, followers of Schwenckfeld, etc. Zinzendorf had
no thought of separation from the Lutheran church. The settlers
were therefore put under the pastoral care of Rothe, the worthy
pastor of Berthelsdorf (§ 166, 6). To organize such a mixed multitude
was no easy task. Only Zinzendorf's glorious enthusiasm for the
idea of a congregation of saints, his eminent organizing talents,
the wonderful elasticity and tenacity of his will, the extraordinary
prudence, circumspection, and wisdom of his management, made it
possible to cement the incongruous elements and avoid an open breach.
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
The Moravians insisted upon restoring their old constitution and
discipline, and of the others, each wished to have prominence given
to whatever he thought specially important. Only on one point were
they all agreed, the duty of refusing to conform to the Lutheran
church and its pastor Rothe. The count, therefore, felt obliged to
form a new and separatist society. Personally he had no special
liking for the old Moravian constitution; but the lot decided in its
favour, while the idea of continuing a pre-Reformation martyr church
was not without a certain charm. Thus Zinzendorf drew up a constitution
with old Moravian forms and names, on the basis of which
the colony was established, August 13th, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1727, under the name of
the United Brotherhood.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_168_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Development of the Brotherhood down to Zinzendorf's Death</emph>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1727-1760.&mdash;With great energy the new society proceeded to
found settlements in Germany, Holland, England, Ireland, Denmark,
Norway, and North America, as well as among German residents in
other lands. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1734, Zinzendorf submitted to examination at
Tübingen as candidate for license, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1737 received episcopal
consecration from the Berlin court preacher, Jablonsky, who was at the
same time bishop of the Moravian Brethren, which the same prelate
had two years previously granted to Dr. Nitschmann, another member
of the society. The efforts of the Brethren to spread their cause now
attracted attention. The Saxon government in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1736 sent to
Herrnhut a commission, of which Löscher was a member. But in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1736, before it submitted its report, which on the whole was
favourable, Zinzendorf quitted the country, probably by the elector's
command at the instigation of the Austrian government, which
objected to the harbouring of so many Bohemian and Moravian
emigrants. Like all those at this time persecuted on account of
religion he took refuge in Wetterau (<ref target='Section_170_Para_2'>§ 170, 2</ref>). With his little
family of pilgrims he settled at Ronneburg near Büdingen, founded
the prosperous churches of Marienborn and Herrnhaag, and travelled
extensively in Europe and America. This period of exile was the
period when the society was most successful in spreading outwardly,
but it was also the period when it suffered most from troubles and
dissensions within. It was bitterly attacked by Lutheran theologians,
and much more venomously by apostates from its own fold. The
Brethren at this time afforded only too much ground for misunderstanding
and reproach. To this period belongs the famous fiction of
a special covenant, the Pandora-box of all other absurdities; the
development of the count's own theological views and peculiar form
of expression in his numerous works; the composition and introduction
of unsavoury spiritual songs, with their silly conceits and many
blasphemous and even obscene pictures and analogies; the market-crier
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
laudations of their church, the not always pure methods of
propaganda, the introduction of a marriage discipline fitted to break
down all modest restraints; and, finally, the so-called <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Niedlichkeiten</foreign>,
or boisterous festivals. Even the pietists opposed these antinomian
excesses. Tersteegen, too (<ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>§ 169, 1</ref>), whose mystic tendency inclined
him strongly toward pietist views, reproached the Herrnhuters with
frivolity. This polemic, disagreeable as it was, exercised a wholesome
influence upon the society. The count became more guarded in his
language, and more prudent in his behaviour, while he set aside the
most objectionable excrescences of doctrine and practice that had
begun to show themselves in the community. At last, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1747, the
Saxon government repeated the edict of banishment so far as the
person of the founder was concerned, and when, two years later, the
society expressly accepted the Augsburg Confession, it was formally
recognised in Saxony. In this same year, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1749, an English act of
parliament recognised it as a church with a pure episcopal succession
on equal terms with the Anglican episcopal church.&mdash;Zinzendorf
continued down to his death to direct the affairs of this church, which
hung upon him with childlike affection, reflecting his personality, not
only in its excellences, but also in all its extravagances. He died in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1760 in the full enjoyment of that blessedness which his fervent
love for the Saviour had brought him.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_168_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Zinzendorf's Plan and Work.</emph>&mdash;While Zinzendorf received his first impulse
from pietism, he soon perceived its onesidedness and narrowness.
He would have no conventicle, but one organized community; no ideal
invisible, but a real visible church; no narrow methodism, but a rich,
free administration of the Christian spirit. He did not, in the first
instance, aim at the conversion of the world, nor even at the reformation
of the church, but at gathering and preserving those belonging
to the Saviour. He hoped, however, to erect a reservoir in which he
might collect every little brooklet of living water, from which he
might again water the whole world. And when he succeeded in
organizing a community, he was quite convinced that it was the
Philadelphia of the Apocalypse (iii. 7 ff.), that it introduced <q>the
Philadelphian period</q> of church history, of which all prophets and
apostles had prophesied. His plan had originally reference to all
Christendom, and he even took a step toward realizing this universal
idea. In order to build a bridge between the Catholic church and
his own community, he issued, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1727, a Christo-Catholic hymn-book
and prayer-book, and had even sketched out a letter to the pope
to accompany a copy of his book. He also attempted, by a letter to
the patriarchs and then to Elizabeth, empress of Russia, to interest
the Greek church in his scheme, dwelling upon the Greek extraction
of the church of the Moravian Brethren (§ 79, 2). His gathering of
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
members, however, was practically limited to the Protestant churches.
All confessions and sects afforded him contingents. He was himself
heartily attached to the distinctive doctrines of the Lutheran church.
But in a society whose distinctive characteristic it was to be the
gathering point for the pious of all nationalities, doctrine and confession
could not be the uniting bond. It could be only a fellowship
of love and not of creed, and the bond a community of loving sentiment
and loving deeds. The inmost principle of Lutheranism, reconciliation
by the blood of Christ, was saved, indeed was made the characteristic
and vital doctrine, the one point of union between Moravians,
Lutherans, and Reformed. Over the three parties stood the count
himself as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ordinarius</foreign>; but this gave an external and not a confessional
unity. The subsequent acceptance of the Augsburg Confession, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1749, was a political act, so as to receive a civil status, and had otherwise
no influence. Instead then of the confession, Zinzendorf made
the <emph>constitution</emph> the bond of union. Its forms were borrowed from the
old Moravian church order, but dominated and inspired by Zinzendorf's
own spirit. The old Moravian constitution was episcopal and
clerical, and proceeded from the idea of the church; while the new
constitution of Herrnhut was essentially presbyterial, and proceeded
from the idea of the community, and that as a communion of saints.
The Herrnhut bishops were only titular bishops; they had no diocese,
no jurisdiction, no power of excommunication. All these prerogatives
belonged to the united eldership, in which the lay element was
distinctly predominant. Herrnhut had no pastors, but only preaching
brothers; the pastoral care devolved upon the elders and their
assistants. But beside these half-Lutheran and pseudo-Moravian
peculiarities, there was also a Donatist element at the basis of the
constitution. This lay in the fundamental idea of absolutely true
and pure children of God, and reached full expression in the concluding
of a <emph>special covenant</emph> with the Saviour at London on Sept.
16th, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1741. Leonard Dober for some years administered the office
of an elder-general. But at the London synod it was declared that
he had not the requisite gifts for that office. Dober now wished to
resign. While in confusion as to whom they could appoint, it flashed
into the minds of all to appoint the Saviour Himself. <q>Our feeling
and heart conviction was, that He made a special covenant with His
little flock, taking us as His peculiar treasure, watching over us in a
special way, personally interesting Himself in every member of our
community, and doing that for us perfectly which our previous elders
could only do imperfectly.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_168_Para_5'/>
5. Among the <emph>numerous extravagances</emph> which Zinzendorf countenanced
for a time, the following may be mentioned. (1) The notion
of the motherhood of the Holy Spirit. Zinzendorf described the holy
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
Trinity as <q>man, woman, and child.</q> The Spirit is the mother in
three respects: the eternal generation of the Son of God, the conception
of the Man Jesus, and the second birth of believers. (2) The notion
of the fatherhood of Jesus Christ (Isa. ix. 6). Creation is ascribed
solely to the Son, hence Christ is our special, direct Father. The
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is only, <q>in the language of men,
our father-in-law or grandfather.</q> (3) In reference to our Lord's
life on earth, Zinzendorf delighted in using terms of contempt, in
order to emphasize the depths of His humiliation. (4) In like manner
he uses reproachful terms in speaking of the style of the sacred
Scriptures, and the inspired community prefers a living Bible. (5)
The theory and practice of mystical marriage, according to Ephesians
v. 32. The community and each member of it are spiritual
brides of Christ, and the marriage relation and begetting of children
were set forth and spiritualized in a singularly indelicate manner.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_168_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Zinzendorf's greatness</emph> lay in the fervency of his love of the
Saviour, and in the yearning desire to gather under the shadow of
the cross all who loved the Lord. His weakness consisted not so
much in his manifested extravagances, as in his idea that he had been
called to found a society. To the realizing of this idea he gave
his life, talents, heart, and means. The advantages of rank and
culture he also gave to this one task. He was personally convinced
of his Divine call, and as he did not recognise the authority of the
written word, but only subjective impressions, it is easily seen how
he would drift into absurdities and inconsistencies. The end contemplated
seemed to him supremely important, so that to realize it
he did not scruple to depart from strict truthfulness.&mdash;Zinzendorf's
writings, over one hundred in number, are characterized by originality,
brilliancy, and peculiar forms of expression. Of his 2,000
hymns, mostly improvised for public services, 700 of the best were
revised and published by Knapp. Two are still found in most collections,
and are more or less reproduced in our English hymns, <q>Jesus
still lead on,</q> and <q>Jesus, Thy blood and righteousness.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_168_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>The Brotherhood under Spangenberg's Administration.</emph>&mdash;For its present
form the Brotherhood is indebted to its wise and sensible bishop,
<emph>Aug. Gottl. Spangenberg</emph>, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1792. Born in 1704, he became
personally acquainted with Zinzendorf in 1727, after he had completed
his studies at Jena under Buddæus, and continued ever after
on terms of close intimacy with him and his community. Through
the good offices of G. A. Francke, son and successor of A. H. Francke,
he was called in Sept., 1732, to the office of an assistantship in the
theological faculty at Halle, and appointed school inspector of the
Orphanage; but very soon offence was taken at the brotherly fellowship
which he had, not only with the society of Herrnhut, but also
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
with other separatists. The misunderstanding that thus arose led
in April, 1733, to his deprivation under a royal cabinet order, and his
expulsion by military power from Halle. He now formally joined
the communion of the Brethren. The first half of his signally blessed
ministry of sixty years among the Moravians was chiefly devoted
to foreign mission work, both in their colonies abroad and in their
stations in heathen lands. In Holland in 1734, in England and
Denmark in 1735, he obtained official permission for the founding of
Moravian colonies in Surinam, in the American state of Georgia, and
in Santa Cruz, the forming and management of which he himself
undertook, besides directing the mission work in these places. Returning
from America in 1762, he won, after Zinzendorf's death, so
complete an ascendency in the church in every respect, that he may
well be regarded as its second founder. At the Synod of Marienborn,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1764, the constitution was revised and perfected. Zinzendorf's
monarchical prerogative was surrendered to the eldership, and
Spangenberg prudently secured the withdrawal of all excrescences
and extravagances. But the central idea of a special covenant was
not touched, and Sept. 16th is still held as a grand pentecost festival.
In the fifth section of the statutes of the United Brethren at Gnaden,
1819, it distinguishes itself from all the churches as a <q>society of
true children of God; as a family of God, with Jesus as its head.</q>
In the fourth section of the <q>Historical Account of the Constitution
of the United Brethren at Gnaden, 1823,</q> the society is described
as <q>a company of living members of the invisible body of Jesus
Christ</q>; and in its litany for Easter morning, it adds as a fourth
particular to the article of the creed: <q>I believe that our brothers
<emph>N. N.</emph>, and our sisters <emph>N. N.</emph> have joined the church above, and
have entered into the joy of the Lord.</q> The synod of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848
modified this article, and generally the society's distinctive views
are not made so prominent. This liberal tendency had dogmatic
expression given to it in Spangenberg's <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Idea Fidei Fratrum</foreign>.</q> Only
a few new settlements have been formed since Zinzendorf's death, and
none of any importance; while the hitherto flourishing Moravian
settlements in Wetterau were destroyed and their members banished,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750, by the reigning prince, Count von Isenburg-Büdingen,
on account of their refusing to take the oath of allegiance.&mdash;After
the first attempt to establish societies among the German emigrants
in Livonia and Esthonia in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1729-1743 had ended in the expulsion
of the Herrnhuters, these regions proved in the second half of the
century a more fruitful field than any other. They secured there a
relation to the national church such as they never attained unto elsewhere.
They had in these parts formally organized a church within
the church, whose members, mostly peasants, felt convinced that they
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
had been called by the Lord's own voice as His chosen little flock,
a proceeding which caused infinite trouble, especially in Livonia, to
the faithful pastors, who perceived the deadly mischief that was
being wrought, and witnessed against them from God's word. This
protest was too powerful and convincing to be disregarded, and now,
not only too late, but also in too half-hearted a way, Herrnhut
began, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1857, to turn back, so as to save its Livonian institute
by inward regeneration from certain overthrow.
</p>

<p>
8. <emph>The doctrinal peculiarities of the Brotherhood</emph> cannot be quite correctly
described as un-Lutheran, or anti-Lutheran. Bengel smartly
characterized them in a single phrase: <q>They plucked up the stock of
sound doctrine, stripped oft what was most essential and vital, and
retained the half of it,</q> which not only then, but even still retains its
truth and worth. Salvation is regarded as proceeding purely from
the Son, the God-Man, so that the relation of the Father and of the
Holy Spirit to redemption is scarcely even nominal; and the redemption
of the God-Man again is viewed one-sidedly as consisting only in
His sufferings and death, while the other side, that is grounded on His
life and resurrection, is either carefully passed over, or its fruit is
represented as borrowed from the atoning death. Thus not only
justification, but sanctification is derived exclusively from the death
of Christ, and this, not so much as a forensic substitutionary satisfaction,
although that is not expressly denied, but rather as a Divine
love-sacrifice which awakens an answering love in us. The whole of
redemption is viewed as issuing from Christ's blood and wounds; and
since from this mode of viewing the subject God's grace and love
are made prominent rather than His righteousness, we hear almost
exclusively of the gospel, and little or nothing of the law. All
preaching and teaching were avowedly directed to the awakening
of pious feelings of love to God, and thus tended to foster a kind of
religious sentimentalism.
</p>

<p>
9. <emph>The peculiarities of worship among the Brethren</emph> were also directed
to the excitement of pious feeling; their sensuously sweet sacred
music, their church hymns, overcharged with emotion, their richly
developed liturgies, their restoration of the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>agape</foreign> with tea, biscuit,
and chorale-singing, the fraternal kiss at communion, in their earlier
days also washing of the feet, etc. The daily watchword from the
O.T. and doctrinal texts from the N.T. were regarded as oracles,
and were intended to give a special impress to the religious feelings
of the day. As early as <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1727 they had a hymn-book containing
972 hymns. Most of these were compositions of their own, a true
reflection of their religious sentiments at that period. It also contained
Bohemian and Moravian hymns, translated by Mich. Weiss,
and also many old favourites of the evangelical church, often sadly
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
mutilated. By <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1749 it had received twelve appendices and four
supplements. In these appendices, especially in the twelfth, the one-sided
tendency to give prominence to feeling was carried to the most
absurd lengths of caricature in the use of offensive and silly terms
of endearment as applied to the Saviour. Zinzendorf admitted the
defects of this production, and had it suppressed in 1751, and in London
prepared a new, expurgated edition of the hymn-book. Under
Spangenberg's presidency Christian Gregor issued, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1778, a
hymn-book, containing 542 from Zinzendorf's book and 308 of his own
pious rhymes. He also published a chorale book in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1784. Among
their sacred poets Zinzendorf stands easily first. His only son,
Christian Renatus, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1752, left behind him a number of
sacred songs. Their hymns were usually set to the melodies of the
Halle pietists.
</p>

<p>
10. In regard to the <emph>Christian life</emph>, the Brotherhood withdrew from
politics and society, adopted stereotyped forms of speech and peculiar
usages, even in their dress. They sought to live undisturbed by
controversy, in personal communion with the Saviour. Their separatism
as a covenanted people may be excused in view of the unbelief
prevailing in the Protestant church, but it has not been overcome by
the reawakening of spiritual life in the Church. As to their <emph>ecclesiastical
constitution</emph>, Christ Himself, as the Chief Elder of the church,
should have in it the direct government. The leaders, founding upon
Proverbs xvi. 33 and Acts i. 26, held that fit expression was given to
this principle by the use of the lot; but soon opposition to this practice
arose, and with its abandonment the <q>special covenant</q> theory
lost all its significance. The lot was used in election of office-bearers,
sending of missionaries, admission to membership, etc. But in regard
to marriage, it was used only by consent of the candidates for marriage,
and an adverse result was not enforced. The administration
of the affairs of the society lay with the conference of the united
elders. From time to time general synods with legislative power
were summoned. The membership was divided into groups of
married, widowed, bachelors, maidens, and children, with special
duties, separate residences, and also special religious services in
addition to those common to all. The church officers were bishops,
presbyters, deacons, deaconesses, and acolytes.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_168_Para_11'/>
11. <emph>Missions to the Heathen.</emph>&mdash;Zinzendorf's meeting with a West
Indian negro in Copenhagen awakened in him at an early period the
missionary zeal. He laid the matter before the church, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1732 the first Herrnhut missionaries, Dober and Nitschmann, went
out to St. Thomas, and in the following year missions were established
in Greenland, North America, almost all the West Indian
islands, South America, among the Hottentots at the Cape, the East
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
Indies, among the Eskimos of Labrador, etc. Their missionary enterprise
forms the most brilliant and attractive part of the history
of the Moravians. Their procedure was admirably suited to uncultured
races, and only for such. In the East Indies, therefore,
they were unsuccessful. They were never wanting in self-denying
missionaries, who resigned all from love to the Saviour. They were
mostly pious, capable artisans, who threw themselves with all their
hearts into their new work, and devoted themselves with affectionate
tenderness to the advancement of the bodily and spiritual interests
of those among whom they laboured. One of the noblest of them all
was the missionary patriarch Zeisberger, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1808, after
toiling among the North American Indians for sixty-three years.
These missions were conducted at a surprisingly small outlay. The
Brethren also interested themselves in the conversion of the Jews.
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1738 Dober wrought among the Jews of Amsterdam; and
with greater success in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1739, Lieberkühn, who also visited the
Jews in England and Bohemia, and was honoured by them with the
title of <q>rabbi.</q><note place='foot'>Spangenberg, <q>Account of Manner in which the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unitas Fratrum</foreign>
Propagate the Gospel, and Carry on their Missions among the Heathen.</q>
London, 1788. Holmes, <q>Historical Sketch of the Missions of the
United Brethren for the Propagation of the Gospel among the
Heathen from their Commencement down to 1817.</q> London, 1827.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 169. The Reformed Church before the <q>Illumination.</q></head>

<p>
The sharpness of the contest between Calvinism and
Lutheranism was moderated on both sides. The union
efforts prosecuted during the first decades of the century
in Germany and Switzerland were always defeated by
Lutheran opposition. In the Dutch and German Reformed
Churches, even during the eighteenth century, Cocceianism
was still in high repute. After it had modified strict
Calvinism, the opposition between Reformed orthodoxy and
Arminian heterodoxy became less pronounced, and more and
more Arminian tendencies found their way into Reformed
theology. What pietism and Moravianism were for the
Lutheran church of Germany, Methodism was, in a much
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
greater measure, and with a more enduring influence, for
the episcopal church of England.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_169_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The German Reformed Church.</emph>&mdash;The Brandenburg dynasty made
unwearied efforts to effect a union between the Lutheran and Reformed
churches throughout their territories (<ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>§ 154, 4</ref>). Frederick I. (III.)
instituted for this purpose in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1703 a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>collegium caritativum</foreign>, under
the presidency of the Reformed court preacher Ursinus (ranked as
bishop, that he might officiate at the royal coronation), in which also,
on the side of the Reformed, Jablonsky, formerly a Moravian bishop,
and, on the part of the Lutherans, the cathedral preacher Winkler
of Magdeburg and Lüttke, provost of Cologne-on-the-Spree, took part.
Spener, who wanted not a made union but one which he himself was
making, gave expression to his opinion, and soon passed over. Lüttke
after a few <foreign rend='italic'>sederunts</foreign> withdrew, and when Winkler in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1703 published
a plan of union, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Arcanum regium</foreign>, which the Lutheran church
merely submitted for the approval of the Reformed king, such a storm
of opposition arose against the project, that it had to be abandoned.
In the following year the king took up the matter again in another
way. Jablonsky engaged in negotiations with England for the
introduction of the Anglican episcopal system into Prussia, in order
by it to build a bridge for the union with Lutheranism. But even
this plan failed, in consequence of the succession of Frederick William
I. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1713, whose shrewd sense strenuously opposed it.&mdash;The vacillating
statements of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Sigismundi</foreign> (<ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>§ 154, 3</ref>) regarding
<emph>predestination</emph> made it possible for the Brandenburg Reformed theologians
to understand it as teaching the doctrine of particular as well
as universal grace, and so to make it correspond with Brandenburg
Reformed orthodoxy. The rector of the Joachimsthal Gymnasium
in Berlin, Paul Volkmann, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1712, interpreted it as teaching
universal grace, and so in his <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Theses theologicæ</foreign> he constructed a
system of theology, in which the divine foreknowledge of the result,
as the reconciling middle term between the particularism and universalism
of the call, was set forth in a manner favourable to the
latter. The controversy that was aroused over this, in which even
Jablonsky argued for the more liberal view, while on the other side
Barckhausen, Volkmann's colleague, in his <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amica Collatio Doctrinæ de
Gratia, quam vera ref. confitetur Ecclesia, cum Doctr. Volkmanni</foreign>, etc.,
came forward under the name of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pacificus Verinus</foreign> as his most determined
opponent, was put a stop to in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1719 by an edict of Frederick
William I., which enjoined silence on both parties, without any result
having been reached.&mdash;One of the noblest mystics that ever lived was
<emph>Gerhard Tersteegen</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1769. He takes a high rank as a sacred
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
poet. Anxious souls made pilgrimages to him from far and near for
comfort, counsel, and refreshment. Though not exactly a separatist,
he had no strong attachment to the church.<note place='foot'><q>Tersteegen: Life and Character, with Extracts from His Letters
and Writings.</q> London, 1832. Winkworth, <q>Christian Singers of
Germany.</q> London, 1869.</note>&mdash;The prayer-book of
<emph>Conrad Mel</emph>, pastor and rector at Hersfeld in Hesse, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1733,
continues to the present day a favourite in pious families of the
Reformed communion.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_169_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Reformed Church in Switzerland.</emph>&mdash;<emph>The Helvetic Confession</emph>, with
its strict doctrine of predestination and its peculiar inspiration theory
(<ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>§ 161, 3</ref>), had been indeed accepted, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1675, by all the Reformed
cantons as the absolute standard of doctrine in church and school;
but this obligation was soon felt to be oppressive to the conscience,
and so the Archbishop of Canterbury and the kings of England and
Prussia repeatedly interceded for its abrogation. In Geneva, though
vigorously opposed by a strictly orthodox minority, the <foreign rend='italic'>Vénérable
Compagnie</foreign> succeeded, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1706, with the rector of the Academy at
its head, J. A. Turretin, whose father had been one of the principal
authors of the formula, in modifying the usual terms of subscription,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sic sentio, sic profiteor, sic docebo, et contrarium non docebo</foreign>, into <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sic
docebo quoties hoc argumentum tractandum suscipiam, contrarium non
docebo, nec ore, nec calamo, nec privatim, nec publice</foreign>; and afterwards, in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1725, it was entirely set aside, and adhesion to the Scriptures of
the O. and N.T., and to the catechism of Calvin, made the only obligation.
More persistent on both sides was the struggle in Lausanne;
yet even there it gradually lost ground, and by the middle of the
century it had no longer any authority in Switzerland.&mdash;The <emph>union
efforts</emph> made by the Prussian dynasty found zealous but unsuccessful
advocates in the chancellor Pfaff of Lutheran Württemberg (<ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>§ 167,
4</ref>), and in Reformed Switzerland in J. A. Turretin of Geneva.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_169_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Dutch Reformed Church.</emph>&mdash;Toward the end of the seventeenth
century, in consequence of threats on the part of the magistrates, the
passionate violence of the <emph>dispute between</emph> Voetians and Cocceians
(<ref target='Section_162_Para_5'>§ 162, 5</ref>) was moderated; but in the beginning of the eighteenth
century the flames burst forth anew, reaching a height in 1712, when
a marble bust of Cocceius was erected in a Leyden church. An obstinate
Voetian, Pastor Fruytier of Rotterdam, was grievously offended
at this proceeding, and published a controversial pamphlet full of the
most bitter reproaches and accusations against the Cocceians, which,
energetically replied to by the accused, was much more hurtful than
useful to the interests of the Voetians. At last a favourable hearing
was given to a word of peace which a highly respected Voetian, the
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
venerable preacher of eighty years of age, <emph>J. Mor. Mommers</emph>, addressed
to the parties engaged in the controversy. He published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1738,
under the title of <q><foreign rend='italic'>Eubulus</foreign>,</q> a tract in which he proved that neither
Cocceius himself nor his most distinguished adherents had in any essential
point departed from the faith of the Reformed church, and that
from them, therefore, in spite of all differences that had since arisen,
the hand of fellowship should not be withheld. In consequence of this,
the magistrates of Gröningen first of all decided, that forthwith, in filling
up vacant pastorates, a Cocceian and Voetian should be appointed
alternately; a principle which gradually became the practice throughout
the whole country. At the same time also care was now taken
that in the theological faculties both schools should have equal representation.
But meanwhile also new departures had been made in
each of the two parties. Among the Voetians, after the pattern
formerly given them by Teellinck (<ref target='Section_162_Para_4'>§ 162, 4</ref>), followed up by the
Frisian preacher Theod. Brakel, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1669, and further developed
by Jodocus von Lodenstein of Utrecht, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1677, mysticism had
made considerable progress; and the Cocceians, in the person of Hermann
Witsius, drew more closely toward the pietism of the Voetians
and the Lutherans. The most distinguished representative of this
conciliatory party was F. A. Lampe of Detmold, afterwards professor
in Utrecht, previously and subsequently pastor in Bremen, in high
repute in his church as a hymn-writer, but best known by his commentary
on John.&mdash;These conciliatory measures were frustrated by
the publication, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1740, of a work by <emph>Schortinghuis</emph> of Gröningen,
which pronounced the Scriptures unintelligible and useless to the
natural man, but made fruitful to the regenerate and elect by the
immediate enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, evidenced by deep
groanings and convulsive writhings. It was condemned by all the
orthodox. The author now confined himself to his pastorate, where
he was richly blessed. He died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750. His notions spread like
an epidemic, till stamped out by the united efforts of the civil and
ecclesiastical authorities in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1752.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_169_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Methodism.</emph>&mdash;<emph>In the episcopal church of England</emph> the living power
of the gospel had evaporated into the formalism of scholastic learning
and a mechanical ritualism. A reaction was set on foot by <emph>John
Wesley</emph>, born <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1703, a young man of deep religious earnestness and
fervent zeal for the salvation of souls. During his course at Oxford,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1729, along with some friends, including his brother Charles,
he founded a society to promote pious living.<note place='foot'>For a slightly different account see Tyerman, vol. i., p. 66.</note> Those thus leagued
together were scornfully called Methodists. From <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1732, <emph>George
Whitefield</emph>, born in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1714, a youth burning with zeal for his own
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
and his fellow men's salvation, wrought enthusiastically along with
them. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1735 the brothers Wesley went to America to labour
for the conversion of the Indians in Georgia. On board ship they
met Nitschmann, and in Savannah Spangenberg, who exercised a
powerful influence over them. John Wesley accepted a pastorate
in Savannah, but encountered so many hindrances, that he decided
to return to England in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1738. Whitefield had just sailed for
America, but returned that same year. Meanwhile Wesley visited
Marienborn and Herrnhut, and so became personally acquainted with
Zinzendorf. He did not feel thoroughly satisfied, and so declined to
join the society. On his return he began, along with Whitefield, the
great work of his life. In many cities they founded religious societies,
preached daily to immense crowds in Anglican churches, and
when the churches were refused, in the open air, often to 20,000 or
even 30,000 hearers. They sought to arouse careless sinners by all the
terrors of the law and the horrors of hell, and by a thorough repentance
to bring about immediate conversion. An immense number of
hardened sinners, mostly of the lower orders, were thus awakened and
brought to repentance amid shrieks and convulsions. Whitefield,
who divided his attentions between England and America, delivered
in thirty-four years 18,000 sermons; Wesley, who survived his younger
companion by twenty-one years, dying in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1791, and was wont to say
the world was his parish, delivered still more. Their association with
the Moravians had been broken off in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1740. To the latter, not only
was the Methodists' style of preaching objectionable, but also their
doctrine of <q>Christian perfection,</q> according to which the true, regenerate
Christian can and must reach a perfect holiness of life, not indeed
free from temptation and error, but from all sins of weakness and
sinful lusts. Wesley in turn accused the Herrnhuters of a dangerous
tendency toward the errors of the quietists and antinomians. Zinzendorf
came himself to London to remove the misunderstanding, but
did not succeed. The great Methodist leaders were themselves separated
from one another in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1741. Whitefield's doctrine of grace
and election was Calvinistic; Wesley's Arminian.&mdash;From <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1748 the
<emph>Countess of Huntingdon</emph> attached herself to the Methodists, and secured
an entrance for their preaching into aristocratic circles. With all her
humility and self-sacrifice she remained aristocrat enough to insist on
being head and organizer. Seeing she could not play this <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> with
Wesley, she attached herself closely to Whitefield. He became her
domestic chaplain, and with other clergymen accompanied her on her
travels. Wherever she went she posed as a <q>queen of the Methodists,</q>
and was allowed to preach and carry on pastoral work. She built
sixty-six chapels, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1768 founded a seminary for training
preachers at Trevecca in Wales, under the oversight of the able and
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
gentle John Fletcher, reserving supreme control to herself. After
Whitefield's death, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1770, the opposition between the Calvinistic
followers of Whitefield and the Arminian Wesleyans burst out in
a much more violent form. Fletcher and his likeminded fellow
labourers were charged with teaching the horrible heresy of the
universality of grace, and were on that account discharged by the
countess from the seminary of Trevecca. They now joined Wesley,
around whom the great majority of the Methodists had gathered.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_169_Para_5'/>
5. The Methodists did not wish to separate from the episcopal
church, but to work as a leaven within it. Whitefield was able to
maintain this connexion by the aid of his aristocratic countess and
her relationship with the higher clergy; but Wesley, spurning such
aid, and trusting to his great powers of organization, felt driven more
and more to set up an independent society. When the churches were
closed against him and his fellow workers, and preaching in the open
air was forbidden, he built chapels for himself.<note place='foot'>Wesley himself continued to preach in the open air till nearly
the end of the year 1790.</note> The first was opened
in Bristol, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1739. When his ordained associates were too few for
the work, he obtained the assistance of lay preachers. He founded two
kinds of religious societies: The <emph>united societies</emph> embraced all, the <emph>band
societies</emph> only the tried and proved of his followers. Then he divided
the <emph>united societies</emph> again into <emph>classes</emph> of from ten to twenty persons
each, and the <emph>class-leaders</emph> were required to give accurate accounts of
the spiritual condition and progress of those under their care. Each
member of the <emph>united</emph> as well as the <emph>band societies</emph> held a <emph>society
ticket</emph>, which had to be renewed quarterly. The outward affairs of
the societies were managed by <emph>stewards</emph>, who also took care of the
poor. A number of local societies constituted a <emph>circuit</emph> with a superintendent
and several itinerant preachers.<note place='foot'>Further details as to the organization of the societies are given in
Tyerman, 1st ed., vol. i., pp. 444, 445.</note> Wesley superintended all
the departments of oversight, administration, and arrangement, supported
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1744 by an annual conference. Daily preaching and
devotional exercises in the chapels, weekly class-meetings, monthly
watchnights, quarterly fasts and lovefeasts, an annual service for
the renewing of the covenant, and a great multiplication of prayer-meetings,
gave a special character to Methodistic piety. Charles
Wesley composed hymns for their services. They carefully avoided
collision with the services of the state church. The American Methodists,
who had been up to this time supplied by Wesley with itinerant
missionaries, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1784, after the War of Independence, gave vigorous
expression to their wish for a more independent ecclesiastical constitution,
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
which led Wesley, in opposition to all right order, to ordain
for them by his own hand several preachers, and to appoint, in the
person of Thomas Coke, a superintendent, who assumed in America the
title of bishop. Coke became the founder of the Methodist Episcopal
Church of America, which soon outstripped all other denominations in
its zeal for the conversion of sinners, and in consequent success. The
breach with the mother church was completed by the adoption of a
creed in which the Thirty-nine Articles were reduced to twenty-five.
At the last conference presided over by Wesley, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1790, it was
announced that they had in Britain 119 circuits, 313 preachers, and
in the United States 97 circuits and 198 preachers. After Wesley's
death, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1791, his autocratic supremacy devolved, in accordance
with the Methodist <q>Magna Charta,</q> the <emph>Deed of Declaration</emph> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1784, upon a fixed conference of 100 members, but its hierarchical
organization has been the cause of many subsequent splits and
divisions.<note place='foot'>Southey, <q>Life of John Wesley.</q> London, 1820. Isaac Taylor,
<q>Wesley and Wesleyanism.</q> London, 1851. Tyerman, <q>Wesley's
Life and Times.</q> 2 vols. 4th ed. London, 1877. Urlin, <q>Churchman's
Life of Wesley.</q> London, 1880. Abbey and Overton, <q>English
Church in 18th Century.</q> 2 vols. London, 1879. Lecky, <q>History
of England in the 18th Century.</q> 2 vols. London, 1878. Stoughton,
<q>History of Religion in England to End of 18th Century.</q> 6 vols.
London, 1882.&mdash;Jackson, <q>Life of Charles Wesley.</q> 2 vols. London,
1841.&mdash;Tyerman, <q>Life of Whitefield.</q> 2 vols. London, 1877.&mdash;Macdonald,
<q>Fletcher of Madeley.</q> London.&mdash;Smith, <q>History of
Methodism.</q> 3 vols. London, 1857. Stevens, <q>History of Methodism.</q>
3 vols. New York, 1858. Stevens, <q>History of the Methodist Episcopal
Church in the United States.</q> 4 vols. New York, 1864. Bangs,
<q>History of the Methodist Episcopal Church.</q> 4 vols. New York,
1839.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_169_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Theological Literature</emph>&mdash;<emph>Clericus</emph>, of Amsterdam, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1736, an
Arminian divine, distinguished himself in biblical criticism, hermeneutics,
exegesis, and church history. <emph>J. J. Wettstein</emph> was in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1730
deposed for heresy, and died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1754 as professor at the Remonstrant
seminary at Amsterdam. His critical edition of the N.T. of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1751 had a great reputation. <emph>Schultens</emph> of Leyden, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750,
introduced a new era for O.T. philology by the comparative study
of related dialects, especially Arabic. He wrote commentaries on
Job and Proverbs. Of the Cocceian exegetes we mention, <emph>Lampe</emph> of
Bremen, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1729. <q>Com. on John,</q> three vols., etc., and <emph>J. Marck</emph>
of Leyden, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1731, <q>Com. on Minor Prophets.</q> In biblical
antiquity, <emph>Reland</emph> of Utrecht, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1718, wrote <q><foreign rend='italic'>Palæstina ex vett.
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
monum. Illustr. Antiquitt. ss.</foreign></q>; in ecclesiastical antiquity, Bingham,
died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1723, <q>Origines Ecclest.; or, Antiquities of the Christian
Church,</q> ten vols., 1724, a masterpiece not yet superseded. Of English
apologists who wrote against the deists, <emph>Leland</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1766,
<q>Advantage and Necessity of the Christian Revelation</q>; <emph>Stackhouse</emph>,
died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1752, <q>History of the Bible.</q> Of dogmatists, <emph>Stapfer</emph> of Bern,
died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1775, and <emph>Wyttenbach</emph> of Marburg, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1779, who followed
the Wolffian method. Among church historians, <emph>J. A. Turretin</emph>
of Geneva, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1757, and <emph>Herm. Venema</emph> of Franeker, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1787.&mdash;The most celebrated of the writers of sacred songs in the English
language was the Congregationalist preacher <emph>Isaac Watts</emph>, died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1748, whose <q>Hymns and Spiritual Songs,</q> which first appeared
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1707, still hold their place in the hymnbooks of all denominations,
and have largely contributed to overthrow the Reformed prejudice
against using any other than biblical psalms in the public service
of praise.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_170'/>
<head>§ 170. New Sects and Fanatics.</head>

<p>
The pietism of the eighteenth century, like the Reformation
of the sixteenth, was followed by the appearance of all
sorts of fanatics and extremists. The converted were collected
into little companies, which, as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ecclesiolæ in ecclesia</foreign>,
preserved the living flame amid prevailing darkness, and
out of these arose separatists who spoke of the church as
Babylon, regarded its ordinances impure, and its preaching a
mere jingle of words. They obtained their spiritual nourishment
from the mystical and theosophical writings of Böhme,
Gichtel, Guyon, Poiret, etc. Their chief centre was Wetterau,
where, in the house of Count Casimir von Berleburg,
all persecuted pietists, separatists, fanatics, and sectaries
found refuge. The count chose from them his court officials
and personal servants, although he himself belonged to the
national Reformed church. There was scarcely a district
in Protestant Germany, Switzerland, and the Netherlands
where there were not groups of such separatists; some
mere harmless enthusiasts, others circulated pestiferous
and immoral doctrines. Quite apart from pietism Swedenborgianism
made its appearance, claiming to have a new
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
revelation. Of the older sects the Baptists and the Quakers
sent off new swarms, and even predestinationism gave rise
to a form of mysticism allied to pantheism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_170_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Fanatics and Separatists in Germany.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Juliana von Asseburg</emph>, a
young lady highly esteemed in Magdeburg for her piety, declared
that from her seventh year she had visions and revelations, especially
about the millennium. She found a zealous supporter in Dr. J. W.
Petersen, superintendent of Lüneburg. After his marriage with
Eleonore von Merlau, who had similar revelations, he proclaimed by
word and writing a fantastic chiliasm and the restitution of all
things. He was deposed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1692, and died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1727.<note place='foot'>Hagenbach, <q>History of Church in 18th and 19th Centuries,</q>
vol. i., pp. 159-164.</note> <emph>Henry
Horche</emph>, professor of theology at Herborn, was the originator of a similar
movement in the Reformed church. He founded several Philadelphian
societies (§ 162, 9) in Hesse, and composed a <q>mystical and
prophetical bible,</q> the so called <q>Marburg Bible,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1712. Of other
fanatical preachers of that period one of the most prominent was
<emph>Hochmann</emph>, a student of law expelled from Halle for his extravagances,
a man of ability and eloquence, and highly esteemed by Tersteegen.
Driven from place to place, he at last found refuge at Berleburg, and
died there in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1721. In Württemberg the pious court chaplain,
<emph>Hedinger</emph>, of Stuttgart, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1703, was the father of pietism and
separatism. The most famous of his followers were <emph>Gruber</emph> and <emph>Rock</emph>,
who, driven from Württemberg, settled with other separatists at
Wetterau, renouncing the use of the sacraments and public worship.
Of those gathered together in the court of Count Casimir, the most
eminent were <emph>Dr. Carl</emph>, his physician, the French mystic <emph>Marsay</emph>, and
<emph>J. H. Haug</emph>, who had been expelled from Strassburg, a proficient in the
oriental languages. They issued a great number of mystical works,
chief of all the Berleburg Bible, in eight vols., 1726-1742, of which Haug
was the principal author. Its exposition proceeded in accordance
with the threefold sense; it vehemently contended against the church
doctrine of justification, against the confessional writings, the clerical
order, the dead church, etc. It showed occasionally profound insight,
and made brilliant remarks, but contained also many trivialities and
absurdities. The mysticism which is prominent in this work lacks
originality, and is compiled from the mystico-theosophical writings of
all ages from Origen down to Madame Guyon.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_170_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Inspired Societies in Wetterau.</emph>&mdash;After the unfortunate issue
of the Camisard War in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1705 (<ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>§ 153, 4</ref>) the chief of the prophets
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
of the Cevennes fled to England. They were at first well received, but
were afterwards excommunicated and cast into prison. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1711
several of them went to the Netherlands, and thence made their way
into Germany. Three brothers, students at Halle, named Pott,
adopted their notion of the gift of inspiration, and introduced it into
Wetterau in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1714. <emph>Gruber</emph> and <emph>Rock</emph>, the leaders of the separatists
there, were at first opposed to the doctrine, but were overpowered by
the Spirit, and soon became its most enthusiastic champions. Prayer-meetings
were organized, immense lovefeasts were held, and by
itinerant brethren an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ecclesia ambulatoria</foreign> was set on foot, by which
spiritual nourishment was brought to believers scattered over the
land and the children of the prophets were gathered from all countries.
The <q>utterances</q> given forth in ecstasy were calls to repentance,
to prayer, to the imitation of Christ, revelations of the divine
will in matters affecting the communities, proclamations of the near
approach of the Divine judgment upon a depraved church and world,
but without fanatical-sensual chiliasm. Also, except in the contempt
of the sacraments, they held by the essentials of the church doctrine.
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1715 a split occurred between the <emph>true</emph> and the <emph>false</emph> among the
inspired. The true maintained a formal constitution, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1716
excluded all who would not submit to that discipline. By <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1719
only Rock claimed the gift of inspiration, and did so till his death
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1749. Gruber died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1728, and with him a pillar of the
society fell. Rock was the only remaining prop. A new era of their
history begins with their intercourse with the Herrnhuters. Zinzendorf
sent them a deputation in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1730, and paid them a visit in
person at Berleberg. Rock's profound Christian personality made a
deep impression upon him. But he was offended at their contempt of
the sacraments, and at the convulsive character of their utterances.
This, however, did not hinder him from expressing his reverence for
their able leader, who in return visited Zinzendorf at Herrnhut in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1732. In the interests of his own society Zinzendorf shrank from
identifying himself with those of Wetterau. Rock denounced him
as a new Babylon-botcher, and he retaliated by calling Rock a false
prophet. When the Herrnhuters were driven from Wetterau in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1750 (§ 168, <ref target='Section_168_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_168_Para_7'>7</ref>), the inspired communities entered on their inheritance.
But with Rock's death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1749 prophecy had ceased among
them. They sank more and more into insignificance, until the revival
of spiritual life, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1816-1821, brought them into prominence again.
Government interference drove most of them to America.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_170_Para_3'/>
3. Quite a peculiar importance belongs to <emph>J. C. Dippel</emph>, theologian,
physician, alchemist, discoverer of Prussian blue and <foreign rend='italic'>oleum dippelii</foreign>,
at first an orthodox opponent of pietism, then, through Gottfr.
Arnold's influence, an adherent of the pietists, and ultimately of the
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
separatists. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1697, under the name of <emph>Christianus Democritus</emph>, he
began to write in a scoffing tone of all orthodox Christianity, with a
strange blending of mysticism and rationalism, but without any trace
profound Christian experience. Persecuted on every hand, exiled or
imprisoned, he went hither and thither through Germany, Holland,
Denmark, and Sweden, and found a refuge at last at Berleberg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1729. Here he came in contact with the inspired, who did everything
in their power to win him over; but he declared that he would rather
give himself to the devil than to this Spirit of God. He was long
intimate with Zinzendorf, but afterwards poured out upon him the
bitterest abuse. He died in the count's castle at Berleberg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1734.<note place='foot'>Hagenbach, <q>History of the Church in the 18th and 19th Centuries,</q>
vol. i., pp. 168-175.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_170_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Separatists of Immoral Tendency.</emph>&mdash;One of the worst was the
<emph>Buttlar sect</emph>, founded by Eva von Buttlar, a native of Hesse, who had
married a French refugee, lived gaily for ten years at the court of
Eisenach, and then joined the pietists and became a rigid separatist.
Separated from her husband, she associated with the licentiate Winter,
and founded a Philadelphian society at Allendorf in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1702, where
the foulest immoralities were practised. Eva herself was reverenced
as the door of paradise, the new Jerusalem, the mother of all, Sophia
come from heaven, the new Eve, and the incarnation of the Spirit.
Winter was the incarnation of the Father, and their son Appenfeller
the incarnation of the Son. They pronounced marriage sinful; sensual
lusts must be slain in spiritual communion, then even carnal
association is holy. Eva lived with all the men of the sect in the
most shameless adultery. So did also the other women of the community.
Expelled from Allendorf after a stay of six weeks, they
sought unsuccessfully to gain a footing in various places. At Cologne
they went over to the Catholic church. Their immoralities
reached their climax at Lüde near Pyrmont. Winter was sentenced
to death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1706, but was let off with scourging. Eva escaped the
same punishment by flight, and continued her evil practices unchecked
for another year. She afterwards returned to Altona, where
with her followers leading outwardly an honourable life, she attached
herself to the Lutheran church, and died, honoured and esteemed,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1717.&mdash;In a similar way arose in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1789 the <emph>Bordelum sect</emph>,
founded at Bordelum by the licentiates Borsenius and Bär; and the
<emph>Brüggeler sect</emph>, at Brüggeler in Canton Bern, where in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1748 the
brothers Kohler gave themselves out as the two witnesses (Rev. xi.).
Of a like nature too was the <emph>sect of Zionites</emph> at Ronsdorf in the Duchy
of Berg. Elias Eller, a manufacturer at Elberfeld, excited by mystical
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
writings, married in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1725 a rich old widow, but soon found
more pleasure in a handsome young lady, Anna von Buchel, who by
a nervous sympathetic infection was driven into prophetic ecstasy.
She proclaimed the speedy arrival of the millennium; Eller identified
her with the mother of the man-child (Rev. xii. 1). When his wife
had pined away through jealousy and neglect and died, he married
Buchel. The first child she bore him was a girl, and the second, a
boy, soon died. When a strong opposition arose in Elberfeld against
the sect, he, along with his followers, founded Ronsdorf, as a New
Zion, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1737. The colony obtained civil rights, and Eller was
made burgomaster. Anna having died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1744, Eller gave his
colony a new mother, and practised every manner of deceit and
tyranny. After the infatuation had lasted a long time, the eyes of
the Reformed pastor Schleiermacher, grandfather of the famous theologian,
were at last opened. By flight to the Netherlands he escaped
the fate of another revolter, whom Eller persuaded the authorities
at Düsseldorf to put to death as a sorcerer. Every complaint against
himself was quashed by Eller's bribery of the officials. After his
death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750 his stepson continued this Zion game for a long
time.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_170_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Swedenborgianism.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Emanuel von Swedenborg</emph> was born at Stockholm,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1688, son of the strict Lutheran bishop of West Gothland,
Jasper Swedberg. He was appointed assessor of the School of
Mines at Stockholm, and soon showed himself to be a man of encyclopædic
information and of speculative ability. After long examination
of the secrets of nature, in a condition of magnetic ecstasy, in
which he thought that he had intercourse with spirits, sometimes in
heaven, sometimes in hell, he became convinced, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1743, that he
was called by these revelations to restore corrupted Christianity by
founding a church of the New Jerusalem as the finally perfected
church. He published the apocalyptic revelations as a new gospel:
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Arcana Cœlestia in Scr. s. Detecta</foreign>,</q> in seven vols.; <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vera Chr. Rel.</foreign>,</q>
two vols. After his death, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1772, his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vera Christiana Religio</foreign></q>
was translated into Swedish, but his views never got much hold in his
native country. They spread more widely in England, where John
Clowes, rector of St. John's Church, Manchester, translated his writings,
and himself wrote largely in their exposition and commendation.
Separate congregations with their own ministers, and forms of worship,
sprang up through England in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1788, and soon there were as
many as fifty throughout the country. From England the New Church
spread to America.&mdash;In Germany it was specially throughout Württemberg
that it found adherents. There, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1765, Oetinger (<ref target='Section_171_Para_9'>§ 171,
9</ref>) recognised Swedenborg's revelations, and introduced many elements
from them into his theosophical system.&mdash;Swedenborg's religious
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
system was speculative mysticism, with a physical basis and rationalizing
results. The aim of religion with him is the opening of an
intimate correspondence between the spiritual world and man, and
giving an insight into the mystery of the connexion between the
two. The Bible (excluding the apostolic epistles, as merely expository),
pre-eminently the Apocalypse, is recognised by him as God's
word; to be studied, however, not in its literal but in its spiritual
or inner sense. Of the church dogmas there is not one which he did
not either set aside or rationalistically explain away. He denounces
in the strongest terms the church doctrine of the Trinity. God is
with him only one Person, who manifests Himself in three different
forms: the Father is the principle of the manifesting God; the Son,
the manifested form; the Spirit, the manifested activity. The purpose
of the manifestation of Christ is the uniting of the human and Divine;
redemption is nothing more than the combating and overcoming of
the evil spirits. But angels and devils are spirits of dead men glorified
and damned. He did not believe in a resurrection of the flesh,
but maintained that the spiritual form of the body endures after
death. The second coming of Christ will not be personal and visible,
but spiritual through a revelation of the spiritual sense of Holy
Scripture, and is realized by the founding of the church of the New
Jerusalem.<note place='foot'>Tafel, <q>Documents concerning the Life and Character of Swedenborg.</q>
3 vols. London, 1875. White, <q>Emanuel Swedenborg, his
Life and Writings.</q> 2 vols. London. 1867.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_170_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>New Baptist Sects (<ref target='Section_163_Para_3'>§ 163, 3</ref>).</emph>&mdash;In Wetterau about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1708 an
anabaptist sect arose called <emph>Dippers</emph>, because they did not recognise
infant baptism and insisted upon the complete immersion of adult
believers. They appeared in Pennsylvania in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1719, and founded
settlements in other states. Of the <q>perfect</q> they required absolute
separation from all worldly practices and enjoyments and a simple,
apostolic style of dress. To baptism and the Lord's supper they added
washing the feet and the fraternal kiss and anointing the sick. The
<emph>Seventh-day Baptists</emph> observe the seventh instead of the first day of
the week, and enjoin on the <q>perfect</q> celibacy and the community of
goods. New sects from England continued to spread over America.
Of these were the <emph>Seed</emph> or <emph>Sucker Baptists</emph>, who identified the non-elect
with the seed of the serpent, and on account of their doctrine of predestination
regarded all instruction and care of children useless. A
similar predestinarian exaggeration is seen in the <emph>Hard-shell Baptists</emph>,
who denounce all home and foreign missions as running counter to
the Divine sovereignty. Many, sometimes called Campbellites from
their founder, reject any party name, claiming to be simply <emph>Christians</emph>,
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
and acknowledge only so much in Scripture as is expressly declared
to be <q>the word of the Lord.</q> The <emph>Six-Principles-Baptists</emph> limit their
creed to the six articles of Hebrews vi. 1, 2. The brothers Haldane,
about the middle of the eighteenth century, founded in Scotland the
Baptist sect of <emph>Haldanites</emph>, which has with great energy applied itself
to the practical cultivation of the Christian life.&mdash;Continuation, §§ <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208,
1</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_3'>211, 3</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_170_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>New Quaker Sects.</emph>&mdash;The <emph>Jumpers</emph>, who sprang up among the
Methodists of Cornwall about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1760, are in principle closely allied
to the early Quakers (<ref target='Section_163_Para_4'>§ 163, 4</ref>). They leaped and danced after the style
of David before the ark and uttered inarticulate howls. They settled
in America, where they have adherents still.&mdash;The <emph>Shakers</emph> originated
from the prophets of the Cevennes who fled to England in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1705.
They converted a Quaker family at Bolton in Lancashire named
Wardley, and the community soon grew. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1758 Anna Lee, wife
of a farrier Stanley, joined the society, and, as the apocalyptic bride,
inaugurated the millennium. She taught that the root of all sin was
the relationship of the sexes. Maltreated by the mob, she emigrated
to America, along with thirty companions, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1774. Though persecuted
here also, the sect increased and formed in the State of New
York the <emph>Millennial Church</emph> or <emph>United Society of Believers</emph>. Anna died
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1784; but her prophets declared that she had merely laid aside
the earthly garb and assumed the heavenly, so that only then the
veneration of <q>Mother Anna</q> came into force. As Christ is the Son
of the eternal Wisdom, Anna is the daughter; as Christ is the second
Adam, she is the second Eve, and spiritual mother of believers as
Christ is their father. Celibacy, community of goods, common labour
(chiefly gardening), as a pleasure, not a burden, common domestic life
as brothers and sisters, and constant intercourse with the spirit world,
are the main points in her doctrine. By the addition of voluntary
proselytes and the adoption of poor helpless children the sect has
grown, till now it numbers 3,000 or 4,000 souls in eighteen villages.
The capital is New Lebanon in the State of New York. The name
Shakers was given them from the quivering motion of body in their
solemn dances. In their services they march about singing <q>On to
heaven we will be going,</q> <q>March heavenward, yea, victorious band,</q>
etc. Like the Quakers (<ref target='Section_163_Para_6'>§ 163, 6</ref>) they have neither a ministry nor
sacraments, and their whole manner of life is modelled on that of the
Quakers. The purity of the relation of brothers and sisters has
always been free from suspicion.<note place='foot'>Evans, <q>Shakers: Compendium of Origin, History, Principles,
and Doctrines of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second
Coming.</q> New York, 1859. Dixon, <q>New America.</q> 2 vols. 8th ed.
London, 1869. Nordhoff, <q>The Communistic Societies of the United
States.</q> London, 1874.</note>
</p>

<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_170_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>Predestinarian-Mystical Sects.</emph>&mdash;The <emph>Hebræans</emph>, founded by Verschoor,
a licentiate of the Reformed church of Holland deposed under
suspicion of Spinozist views, in the end of the seventeenth century,
hold it indispensably necessary to read the word of God in the original.
They were fatalists, and maintained that the elect could commit no sin.
True faith consisted in believing this doctrine of their own sinlessness.
About the same time sprang up the <emph>Hattemists</emph>, followers of <emph>Pontiaan
von Hattem</emph>, a preacher deposed for heresy, with fatalistic views like
the Hebræans, but with a strong vein of pantheistic mysticism. True
piety consisted in the believer resting in God in a purely passive
manner, and letting God alone care for him. The two sects united
under the name of Hattemists, and continued to exist in Holland and
Zealand till about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1760.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_171'/>
<head>§ 171. Religion, Theology, and Literature of the
<q>Illumination.</q><note place='foot'>Pusey, <q>Historical Inquiry into the Causes of the Prevalence of
Rationalism in Germany.</q> London, 1828. Rose, <q>The State of
Protestantism in Germany.</q> Oxford, 1829. Saintes, <q>A Critical
History of Rationalism in Germany, from its Origin till the Present
Time.</q> London, 1849. Lecky, <q>History of the Rise and Influence
of the Spirit of Rationalism in Europe.</q> 2 vols. London, 1873.
Farrar, <q>Critical History of Free Thought in Reference to the
Christian Religion.</q> London, 1863. Hagenbach, <q>German Rationalism.</q>
Edinburgh, 1865. Hurst, <q>History of Rationalism.</q> New
York, 1865. Gestwick, <q>German Culture and Christianity, their
Controversy, 1770-1880.</q> New York, 1882.</note></head>

<p>
In England during the first half of the century deism had
still several active propagandists, and throughout the whole
century efforts, not altogether unsuccessful, were made to
spread Unitarian views. From the middle of the century,
when the English deistic unbelief had died out, the <q>Illumination,</q>
under the name of rationalism, found an entrance
into Germany. Arminian pelagianism, recommended by
brilliant scholarship, English deism, spread by translations
and refutations, and French naturalism, introduced by a
great and much honoured king, were the outward factors
in securing this result. The freemason lodges, carried
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
into Germany from England, a relic of mediævalism, aided
the movement by their endeavour after a universal religion
of a moral and practical kind. The inward factors were
the Wolffian philosophy (<ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>§ 167, 3</ref>), the popular philosophy,
and the pietism, with its step-father separatism (<ref target='Section_170'>§ 170</ref>), which
immediately prepared the soil for the sowing of rationalism.
Orthodoxy, too, with its formulas that had been outlived,
contributed to the same end. German rationalism is
essentially distinguished from Deism and Naturalism by not
breaking completely with the Bible and the church, but
eviscerating both by its theories of accommodation and by
its exaggerated representations of the limitations of the
age in which the books of Scripture were written and the
doctrines of Christianity were formulated. It thus treats
the Bible as an important document, and the church as a
useful religious institution. Over against rationalism arose
supernaturalism, appealing directly to revelation. It was a
dilution of the old church faith by the addition of more or
less of the water of rationalism. Its reaction was therefore
weak and vacillating. The temporary success of the vulgar
rationalism lay, not in its own inherent strength, but in the
correspondence that existed between it and the prevailing
spirit of the age. The philosophy, however, as well as the
national literature of the Germans, now began a victorious
struggle against these tendencies, and though itself often
indifferent and even hostile to Christianity, it recognised in
Christ a school-master. Pestalozzi performed a similar
service to popular education by his attempts to reform effete
systems.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Deism, Arianism, and Unitarianism in the English Church.</emph>&mdash;(1) <emph>The
Deists</emph> (<ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>§ 164, 3</ref>). With Locke's philosophy (<ref target='Section_164_Para_2'>§ 164, 2</ref>) deism entered
on a new stage of its development. It is henceforth vindicated on
the ground of its reasonableness. The most notable deists of this age
were <emph>John Toland</emph>, an Irishman, first Catholic, then Arminian, died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1722, author of <q>Christianity not Mysterious,</q> <q>Nazarenus, or
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
Jewish, Gentile, and Mohametan Christianity,</q> etc. The Earl of
<emph>Shaftesbury</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1713, wrote <q>Characteristics of Men,</q> etc.
<emph>Anthony Collins</emph>, J.P. in Essex, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1729, author of <q>Priestcraft
in Perfection,</q> <q>Discourse of Freethinking,</q> etc. <emph>Thomas Woolston</emph>,
fellow of Cambridge, died in prison in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1733, author of <q>Discourse
on the Miracles of the Saviour.</q> <emph>Mandeville</emph> of Dort, physician in
London, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1733, wrote <q>Free Thoughts on Religion.</q> <emph>Matthew
Tindal</emph>, professor of law in Oxford, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1733, wrote <q>Christianity
as Old as the Creation.</q> <emph>Thomas Morgan</emph>, nonconformist minister,
deposed as an Arian, then a physician, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1743, wrote <q>The
Moral Philosopher.</q> <emph>Thomas Chubb</emph>, glover and tallow-chandler in
Salisbury, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1747, author of popular compilations, <q>The True
Gospel of Jesus Christ.</q> Viscount <emph>Bolingbroke</emph>, statesman, charged
with high treason and pardoned, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1751, writings entitled,
<q>Philosophical Works.</q>&mdash;Along with the deists as an opponent of
positive Christianity may be classed the famous historian and sceptic
<emph>David Hume</emph>, librarian in Edinburgh, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1776, author of <q>Inquiry
concerning the Human Understanding,</q> <q>Natural History of Religion,</q>
<q>Dialogues concerning Natural Religion,</q> etc.<note place='foot'>Stephen, <q>History of English Thought in the 18th Century.</q>
2 vols. London, 1876. Cairns, <q>Unbelief in the 18th Century.</q>
Edinburgh, 1881. Pünjer, <q>History of Christian Philosophy of
Religion from Reformation to Kant,</q> § 5, <q>The English Deists.</q>
Edinburgh, 1887.</note>&mdash;Deism never
made way among the people, and no attempt was made to form a sect.
Among the numerous opponents of deism these are chief: Samuel
Clarke, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1729; Thomas Sherlock, Bishop of London, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1761; Chandler, Bishop of Durham, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750; Leland, Presbyterian
minister in Dublin, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1766, wrote <q>View of Principal
Deistic Writers,</q> three vols., 1754; Warburton, Bishop of Gloucester,
died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1779; Nath. Lardner, dissenting minister, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1768,
wrote <q>Credibility of the Gospel History,</q> seventeen vols., 1727-1757.
With these may be ranked the famous pulpit orator of the Reformed
church of France, Saurin, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1730, author of <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Discours hist.,
crit., theol., sur les Evénements les plus remarkables du V. et N.T.</foreign>&mdash;(2)
<emph>The So-called Arians.</emph> In the beginning of the century several distinguished
theologians of the Anglican church sought to give currency
to an Arian doctrine of the Trinity. Most conspicuous was <emph>Wm.
Whiston</emph>, a distinguished mathematician, physicist, and astronomer of
the school of Sir Isaac Newton, and his successor in the mathematical
chair at Cambridge. Deprived of this office in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1708 for spreading
his heterodox views, he issued in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1711 a five-volume work, <q>Primitive
Christianity Revived,</q> in which he justified his Arian doctrine of
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
the Trinity as primitive and as taught by the ante-Nicene Fathers, and
insisted upon augmenting the N.T. canon by the addition of twenty-nine
books of the apostolic and other Fathers, including the apostolic
<q>Constitutions</q> and <q>Recognitions</q> which he maintained were genuine
works of Clement. Subsequently he adopted Baptist views, and lost
himself in fantastic chiliastic speculations. He died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1752. More
sensible and moderate was <emph>Samuel Clarke</emph>, also distinguished as a
mathematician of Newton's school and as a classical philologist. As
an opponent of deism in sermons and treatises he had gained a high
reputation as a theologian, when his work, <q>The Scripture Doctrine
of the Trinity,</q> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1712, led to his being accused of Arianism by
convocation; but by conciliatory explanations he succeeded in retaining
his office till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1729. But the excitement caused
by the publication of his work continued through several decades, and
was everywhere the cause of division. His ablest apologist was Dan.
Whitby, and his keenest opponent Dan. Waterland.&mdash;(3) <emph>The Later
Unitarians.</emph> The anti-trinitarian movement entered on a new stage in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1770. After Archdeacon Blackburne of London, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1766, had
started the idea, at first anonymously, in his <q>Confessional,</q> he joined
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1772 with other freethinkers, among whom was his son-in-law
<emph>Theophilus Lindsey</emph>, in presenting to Parliament a petition with 250
signatures, asking to have the clergy of the Anglican church freed
from the obligation of subscribing to the Thirty-nine Articles and the
Liturgy, and to have the requirement limited to assent to the Scriptures.
This prayer was rejected in the Lower House by 217 votes
against 71. Lindsey now resigned his clerical office, announced his
withdrawal from the Anglican church, founded and presided over a
Unitarian congregation in London from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1774, and published a
large number of controversial Unitarian tracts. He died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1808.
The celebrated chemist and physicist <emph>Joseph Priestley</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1733-1806,
who had been a dissenting minister in Birmingham from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1780,
joined the Unitarian movement in 1782, giving it a new impetus by
his high scientific reputation. He wrote the <q>History of the Corruptions
of Christianity,</q> and the <q>History of Early Opinions about
Jesus Christ,</q> denying that there is any biblical foundation for
the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity, and seeking to show that it
had been forced upon the church against her will from the Platonic
philosophy. These and a whole series of other controversial writings
occasioned great excitement, not only among theologians, but also
among the English people of all ranks. At last the mob rose against
him in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1791. His house and all his scientific collections and
apparatus were burnt. He narrowly escaped with his life, and soon
after settled in America, where he wrote a church history in four
vols. Of his many English opponents the most eminent was Bishop
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
Sam. Horsley, a distinguished mathematician and commentator on
the works of Sir Isaac Newton.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Freemasons.</emph>&mdash;The mediæval institution of freemasons (§ 104, 13)
won much favour in England, especially after the Great Fire of London
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1666. The first step toward the formation of freemason lodges
of the modern type was taken about the end of the sixteenth century,
when men of distinction in other callings sought admission as honorary
members. After the rebuilding of London and the completion
of St. Paul's in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1710, most of the lodges became defunct, and the
four that continued to exist united in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1717 into one grand lodge
in London, which, renouncing material masonry, assumed the task of
rearing the temple of humanity. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1721 the Rev. Mr. Anderson
prepared a constitution for this reconstruction of a trade society into
a universal brotherhood, according to which all <q>free masons</q> faithfully
observing the moral law as well as all the claims of humanity
and patriotism, came under obligation to profess the religion common
to all good men, transcending all confessional differences, without any
individual being thereby hindered from holding his own particular
views. Although, in imitation of the older institution, all members
by reason of their close connexion were bound to observe the strictest
secrecy in regard to their masonic signs, rites of initiation and promotion,
and forms of greeting, it is not properly a secret society, since
the constitution was published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1723, and members publicly
acknowledge that they are such.&mdash;From London the new institute
spread over all England and the colonies. Lodges were founded in
Paris in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1725, in Hamburg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1737, in Berlin in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1740.
This last was raised in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1744 into a grand lodge, with Frederick
II. as grand master. But soon troubles and disputes arose, which
broke up the order about the end of the century. Rosicrucians
(<ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>§ 160, 1</ref>) and alchemists, pretending to hold the secrets of occult
science, Jesuits (<ref target='Section_210_Para_1'>§ 210, 1</ref>), with Catholic hierarchical tendencies, and
<q>Illuminati</q> (<ref target='Section_165_Para_13'>§ 165, 13</ref>), with rationalistic and infidel tendencies, as
well as adventurers of every sort, had made the lodges centres of
quackery, juggling, and plots.<note place='foot'>Halliwell, <q>The Early History of English Freemasonry.</q>
London, 1840.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The German <q>Illumination.</q></emph>&mdash;(1) <emph>Its Precursors.</emph> One of the first
of these, following in the footsteps of Kuntzen and Dippel, was <emph>J. Chr.
Edelmann</emph> of Weissenfels, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1767. He began in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1735
the publication of an immense series of writings in a rough but
powerful style, filled with bitter scorn for positive Christianity. He
went from one sect to another, but never found what he sought. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1741 he accepted Zinzendorf's invitation, and stayed with the
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
count for a long time. He next joined the Berleberg separatists,
because they despised the sacraments, and contributed to their Bible
commentary, though Haug had to alter much of his work before it
could be used. This and his contempt for prayer brought the connexion
between him and the society to an end. He then led a vagabond
life up and down through Germany. Edelmann regarded himself
as a helper of providence, and at least a second Luther. Christianity
he pronounced the most irrational of all religions; church history
a conglomeration of immorality, lies, hypocrisy, and fanaticism;
prophets and apostles, bedlamites; and even Christ by no means a
perfect pattern and teacher. The world needs only one redemption&mdash;redemption
from Christianity. Providence, virtue, and immortality
are the only elements in religion. No less than 166 separate treatises
came from his facile pen.&mdash;<emph>Laurence Schmidt</emph> of Wertheim in Baden,
a scholar of Wolff, was author of the notorious <q>Wertheimer Bible
Version,</q> which rendered Scripture language into the dialect of the
eighteenth century, and eviscerated it of all positive doctrines of
revelation. This book was confiscated by the authorities, and its
author cast into prison.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_4'/>
4. (2) <emph>The Age of Frederick the Great.</emph> Hostility to all positive
Christianity spread from England and France into Germany. The
writings of the English deists were translated and refuted, but mostly
in so weak a style that the effect was the opposite of that intended.
Whilst English deism with its air of thoroughness made way among
the learned, the poison of frivolous French naturalism committed
its ravages among the higher circles. The great king of Prussia
<emph>Frederick II.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1740-1786, surrounded by French freethinkers
Voltaire, D'Argens, La Metrie, etc., wished every man in his kingdom
to be saved after his own fashion. In this he was quite earnest,
although his personal animosity to all ecclesiastical and pietistic
religion made him sometimes act harshly and unjustly. Thus, when
Francke of Halle (son of the famous A. H. Francke) had exhorted his
theological students to avoid the theatre, the king, designating him
<q>hypocrite</q> Francke, ordered him to attend the theatre himself and
have his attendance attested by the manager. His bitter hatred of
all <q>priests</q> was directed mainly against their actual or supposed
intolerance, hypocrisy, and priestly arrogance; and where he met with
undoubted integrity, as in Gellert and Seb. Bach, or simple, earnest
piety, as in General Ziethen, he was not slow in paying to it the
merited tribute of hearty acknowledgment and respect. His own
religion was a philosophical deism, from which he could thoroughly
refute Holbach's materialistic <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Système de la Nature</foreign>.</q>&mdash;Under the
name of the German popular philosophy (Moses Mendelssohn, Garve,
Eberhard, Platner, Steinbart, etc.), which started from the Wolffian
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
philosophy, emptied of its Christian contents, there arose a weak,
vapoury, and self-satisfied philosophizing on the part of the common
human reason. Basedow was the reformer of pedagogy in the sense of
the <q>Illumination,</q> after the style of Rousseau, and crying up his wares
in the market made a great noise for a while, although Herder declared
that he would not trust calves, far less men, to be educated by such a
pedagogue. The <q>Universal German Library</q> of the Berlin publisher
Nicolai, 106 vols. <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1765-1792, was a literary Inquisition tribunal
against all faith in revelation or the church. The <q>Illumination</q> in
the domain of theology took the name of rationalism. Pietistic Halle
cast its skin, and along with Berlin took front rank among the promoters
of the <q>Illumination.</q> In the other universities champions of
the new views soon appeared, and rationalistic pastors spread over all
Germany, to preach only of moral improvement, or to teach from the
pulpit about the laws of health, agriculture, gardening, natural science,
etc. The old liturgies were mutilated, hymn-books revised after the
barbarous tastes of the age, and songs of mere moral tendency substituted
for those that spoke of Christ's atonement. An ecclesiastical
councillor, Lang of Regensburg, dispensed the communion with the
words: <q>Eat this bread! The Spirit of devotion rest on you with His
rich blessing! Drink a little wine! The virtue lies not in this wine;
it lies in you, in the divine doctrine, and in God.</q> The Berlin
provost, W. Alb. Teller, declared publicly: <q>The Jews ought on
account of their faith in God, virtue, and immortality, to be regarded
as genuine Christians.</q> C. Fr. Bahrdt, after he had been deposed
for immorality from various clerical and academical offices, and was
cast off by the theologians, sought to amuse the people with his wit
as a taphouse-keeper in Halle, and died there of an infamous disease
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1792.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_5'/>
5. (3) <emph>The Wöllner Reaction.</emph>&mdash;In vain did the Prussian government,
after the death of Frederick the Great, under Frederick William II.,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1786-1797, endeavour to restore the church to the enjoyment of
its old exclusive rights by punishing every departure from its doctrines,
and insisting that preaching should be in accordance with the
Confession. At the instigation of the Rosicrucians (<ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>§ 160, 1</ref>) and of the
minister Von Wöllner, a country pastor ennobled by the king, the
<emph>Religious Edict of 1788</emph> was issued, followed by a statement of severe
penalties; then by a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema Examinationis Candidatorum ss. Ministerii
rite Instituendi</foreign>; and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1791, by a commission for examination
under the Berlin chief consistory and all the provincial consistories,
with full powers, not only over candidates, but also over all settled
pastors. But notwithstanding all the energy with which he sought
to carry out his edict, the minister could accomplish nothing in the
face of public opinion, which favoured the resistance of the chief
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
consistory. Only one deposition, that of Schulz of Gielsdorf, near
Berlin, was effected, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1792. Frederick William III., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1797-1840,
dismissed Wöllner in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1798, and set aside the edict as only
fostering hypocrisy and sham piety.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The Transition Theology.</emph>&mdash;Four men, who endeavoured to maintain
their own belief in revelation, did more than all others to prepare
the way for rationalism: Ernesti of Leipzig, in the department of N.T.
exegesis; Michaelis of Göttingen, in O.T. exegesis; Semler of Halle,
in biblical and historical criticism; and Töllner of Frankfort-on-the-Oder,
in dogmatics. <emph>J. A. Ernesti</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1707-1781, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1734 rector
of St. Thomas' School, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1742 professor at Leipzig, colleague to
Chr. A. Crusius (<ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>§ 167, 3</ref>), was specially eminent as a classical scholar,
and maintained his reputation in that department, even after becoming
professor of theology in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1758. His <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Institutio Interpretis N.T.</foreign>, of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1761, made it an axiom of exegesis that the exposition of Scripture
should be conducted precisely as that of any other book. But even in
the domain of classical literature there must be an understanding of
the author as a whole, and the expositor must have appreciation of
the writer's spirit, as well as have acquaintance with his language and
the customs of his age. And just from Ernesti's want of this, his
treatise on biblical hermeneutics is rationalistic, and he became the
father of rationalistic exegesis, though himself intending to hold
firmly by the doctrine of inspiration and the creed of the church.&mdash;What
Ernesti did for the N.T., <emph>J. D. Michaelis</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1717-1791, son
of the pious and orthodox Chr. Bened. Michaelis, did for the O.T. He
was from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750 professor at Göttingen, a man of varied learning
and wide influence. He publicly acknowledged that he had never
experienced anything of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>testimonium Sp. s. internum</foreign>, and rested his
proofs of the divinity of the Scriptures wholly on external evidences,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> miracles, prophecy, authenticity, etc., a spider's web easily blown
to pieces by the enemy. No one has ever excelled him in the art of
foisting his own notions on the sacred authors and making them
utter his favourite ideas. A conspicuous instance of this is his <q>Laws
of Moses,</q> in six vols.&mdash;In a far greater measure than either Ernesti or
Michaelis did <emph>J. Sol. Semler</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1725-1791, pupil of Baumgarten, and
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1751 professor at Halle, help on the cause of rationalism. He
had grown up under the influence of Halle pietism in the profession
of a customary Christianity, which he called his private religion,
which contributed to his life a basis of genuine personal piety. But
with a rare subtlety of reasoning as a man of science, endowed with
rich scholarship, and without any wish to sever himself from Christianity,
he undermined almost all the supports of the theology of the
church. This he did by casting doubt on the genuineness of the biblical
writings, by setting up a theory of inspiration and accommodation
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
which admitted the presence of error, misunderstanding, and pious
fraud in the Scriptures, by a style of exposition which put aside everything
unattractive in the N.T. as <q>remnants of Judaism,</q> by a critical
treatment of the history of the church and its doctrines, which represented
the doctrines of the church as the result of blundering, misconception,
and violence, etc. He was a voluminous author, leaving
behind him no less than 171 writings. He sowed the wind, and reaped
the whirlwind, by which he himself was driven along. He firmly
withstood the installation of Bahrdt at Halle, opposed Basedow's
endeavours, applied himself eagerly to refute the <q>Wolfenbüttel Fragments</q>
of Reimarus, edited by Lessing in 1774-1778, which represented
Christianity as founded upon pure deceit and fraud, and defended even
the edict of Wöllner. But the current was not thus to be stemmed,
and Semler died broken-hearted at the sight of the heavy crop from his
own sowing.&mdash;J. Gr. Töllner, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1724-1774, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1756 professor at
Frankfort-on-the-Oder, was in point of learning and influence by no
means equal to those now named; yet he deserves a place alongside
of them, as one who opened the door to rationalism in the department
of dogmatics. He himself held fast to the belief in revelation,
miracles, and prophecy, but he also regarded it as proved that God
saves men by the revelation of nature; the revelation of Scripture is
only a more sure and perfect means. He also examined the divine
inspiration of Scripture, and found that the language and thoughts
were the authors' own, and that God was concerned in it in a manner
that could not be more precisely determined. Finally, in treating of
the active obedience of Christ, he gives such a representation of it
as sets aside the doctrine of the church.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>The Rationalistic Theology.</emph>&mdash;From the school of these men, especially
from that of Semler, went forth crowds of rationalists, who for
seventy years held almost all the professorships and pastorates of Protestant
Germany. At their head stands <emph>Bahrdt</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1741-1792, writer
at first of orthodox handbooks, who, sinking deeper and deeper through
vanity, want of character, and immorality, and following in the steps
of Edelmann, wrote 102 vols., mostly of a scurrilous and blasphemous
character. The rationalists, however, were generally of a nobler sort:
<emph>Griesbach</emph> of Jena, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1745-1812, distinguished as textual critic of
the N.T.; <emph>Teller</emph> of Berlin, published a lexicon to the N.T., which
substituted <q>leading another life</q> for regeneration, <q>improvement</q>
for sanctification, etc.; Koppe of Göttingen, and Rosenmüller of
Leipzig wrote <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>scholia</foreign> on N.T., and Schulze and Bauer on the O.T.
Of far greater value were the performances of <emph>J. E. Eichhorn</emph> of Göttingen,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1752-1827, and <emph>Bertholdt</emph> of Erlangen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1774-1822, who
wrote introductions to the O.T. and commentaries. In the department
of church history, <emph>H. P. C. Henke</emph> of Helmstadt and the talented
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
statesman, <emph>Von Spittler</emph> of Württemberg, wrote from the rationalistic
standpoint. Steinbart and Eberhardt wrote more in the style of the
popular philosophy. The subtle-minded <emph>J. H. Tieftrunk</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1760-1837,
professor of philosophy at Halle, introduced into theology the Kantian
philosophy with its strict categories. Jerusalem, Zollikofer, and
others did much to spread rationalistic views by their preaching.<note place='foot'>Ritschl, <q>History of Christian Doctr. of Justification and Reconciliation,</q>
pp. 347-426. Dorner, <q>History of Protestant Theology,</q>
vol. ii., pp. 277-292. Hagenbach, <q>History of The Church in The 18th and
19th Centuries,</q> vol. i., pp. 251-321.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>Supernaturalism.</emph>&mdash;Abandoning the old orthodoxy without surrendering
to rationalism, the supernaturalists sought to maintain their
hold of the Scripture revelation. Many of them did so in a very
uncertain way: their revelation had scarcely anything to reveal which
was not already given by reason. Others, however, eagerly sought
to preserve all essentially vital truths. Morus of Leipzig, Ernesti's
ablest student, Less of Göttingen, Döderlein of Jena, Seiler of
Erlangen, and Nösselt of Halle, were all representatives of this school.
More powerful opponents of rationalism appeared in <emph>Storr</emph> of Tübingen,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1746-1805, who could break a lance even with the philosopher
of Königsberg, <emph>Knapp</emph> of Halle, and <emph>Reinhard</emph> of Dresden, the most
famous preacher of his age. Reinhard's sermon on the Reformation
festival of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1800 created such enthusiasm in favour of the
Lutheran doctrine of justification, that government issued an edict
calling the attention of all pastors to it as a model. The most distinguished
apologists were the mathematician <emph>Euler</emph> of St. Petersburg,
the physiologist, botanist, geologist, and poet <emph>Haller</emph> of Zürich
and the theologians <emph>Lilienthal</emph> of Königsberg and <emph>Kleuker</emph> of Kiel.
The most zealous defender of the faith was the much abused <emph>Goeze</emph>
of Hamburg, who fought for the palladium of Lutheran orthodoxy
against his rationalistic colleagues, against the theatre, against Barth,
Basedow, and such-like, against the <q>Wolfenbüttel Fragments,</q> against
the <q>Sorrows of Werther,</q> etc. His polemic may have been over-violent,
and he certainly was not a match for such an antagonist as
Lessing; he was, however, by no means an obscurantist, ignoramus,
fanatic, or hypocrite, but a man in solemn earnest in all he did. In the
field of church history important services were rendered by <emph>Schröckh</emph>
of Wittenberg and <emph>Walch</emph> of Göttingen, laborious investigators and
compilers, <emph>Stäudlin</emph> and <emph>Planck</emph> of Göttingen, and <emph>Münter</emph> of Copenhagen.&mdash;Among
English theologians of this tendency toward the end
of the century, the most famous was <emph>Paley</emph> of Cambridge, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1743-1805,
whose <q>Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy</q> and
<q>Evidences of Christianity</q> were obligatory text-books in the university.
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
His <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Horæ Paulinæ</foreign></q> prove the credibility of the Acts of
the Apostles from the epistles, and his <q>Natural Theology</q> demonstrates
God's being and attributes from nature.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>Mysticism and Theosophy.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Oetinger</emph> of Württemburg, the <foreign rend='italic'>Magus</foreign>
of the South, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1702-1782, takes rank by himself. He was a pupil
of Bengel (<ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>§ 167, 3</ref>), well grounded in Scripture, but also an admirer of
Böhme and sympathising with the spiritualistic visions of Swedenborg.
But amid all, with his biblical realism and his theosophy, which held
corporeity to be the end of the ways of God, he was firmly rooted in the
doctrines of Lutheran orthodoxy.&mdash;The best mystic of the Reformed
church was <emph>J. Ph. Dutoit</emph> of Lausanne, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1721-1793, an enthusiastic
admirer of Madame Guyon; he added to her quietist mysticism
certain theosophical speculations on the original nature of Adam, the
creation of woman, the fall, the necessity of the incarnation apart
from the fall, the basing of the sinlessness of Christ upon the immaculate
conception of his mother, etc. He gathered about him during
his lifetime a large number of pious adherents, but after his death
his theories were soon forgotten.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_10'/>
10. <emph>The German Philosophy.</emph>&mdash;As Locke accomplished the descent from
Bacon to deism and materialism, so <emph>Wolff</emph> effected the transition from
Leibnitz to the popular philosophy. <emph>Kant</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1724-1804, saved philosophy
from the baldness and self-sufficiency of Wolffianism, and pointed
it to its proper element in the spiritual domain. Kant's own philosophy
stood wholly outside of Christianity, on the same platform with
rationalistic theology. But by deeper digging in the soil it unearthed
many a precious nugget, of whose existence the vulgar rationalism had
never dreamed, without any intention of becoming a schoolmaster to
lead to Christ. Kant showed the impossibility of a knowledge of the
supernatural by means of pure reason, but admitted the ideas of God,
freedom, and immortality as postulates of the practical reason and as
constituting the principle of all religion, whose only content is the
moral law. Christianity and the Bible are to remain the basis of
popular instruction, but are to be expounded only in an ethical sense.
While in sympathy with rationalism, he admits its baldness and self-sufficiency.
His keen criticism of the pure reason, the profound knowledge
of human weakness and corruption shown in his doctrine of
radical evil, his categorical imperative of the moral law, were well
fitted to awaken in more earnest minds a deep distrust of themselves,
a modest estimate of the boasted excellences of their age, and a feeling
that Christianity could alone meet their necessities.&mdash;<emph>F. H. Jacobi</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1743-1819, <q>with the heart a Christian, with the understanding a
pagan,</q> as he characterized himself, took religion out of the region of
mere reason into the depths of the universal feelings of the soul, and
so awakened a positive aspiration.&mdash;<emph>J. G. Fichte</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1762-1814, transformed
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
Kantianism, to which he at first adhered, into an idealistic
science of knowledge, in which only the <emph>ego</emph> that posits itself appears
as real, and the <emph>non-ego</emph>, only by its being posited by the <emph>ego</emph>; and
thus the world and nature are only a reflex of the mind. But when,
accused of atheism in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1798, he was expelled from his position in
Jena, he changed his views, rushing from the verge of atheism into a
mysticism approaching to Christianity. In his <q>Guide to a Blessed
Life,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1806, he delivered religion from being a mere servant to
morals, and sought the blessedness of life in the loving surrender of
one's whole being to the universal Spirit, the full expression of which
he found in John's Gospel. Pauline Christianity, on the other hand,
with its doctrine of sin and redemption, seemed to him a deterioration,
and Christ Himself only the most complete representative of the
incarnation of God repeated in all ages and in every pious man.&mdash;In
the closing years of the century, <emph>Schelling</emph> brought forward his theory
of <emph>identity</emph>, which was one of the most powerful instruments in
introducing a new era.<note place='foot'>Chalybæus, <q>Historical Development of Speculative Philosophy,
from Kant to Hegel.</q> Edin., 1854. Räbiger, <q>Theological Encyclopædia,</q>
vol. i., pp. 73-76.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_11'/>
11. <emph>The German National Literature.</emph>&mdash;When the powerful strain of
the evangelical church hymn had well-nigh expired in the feeble
lispings of <emph>Gellert's</emph> sacred poetry, <emph>Klopstock</emph> began to chant the praises
of the Messiah in a higher strain. But the pathos of his odes met
with no response, and his <q>Messiah,</q> of which the first three cantos
appeared in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1748, though received with unexampled enthusiasm,
could do nothing to exorcise the spirit of unbelief, and was more
praised than read. The theological standpoint of <emph>Lessing</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1729-1781,
is set forth in one of his letters to his brother. <q>I despise the
orthodox even more than you do, only I despise the clergy of the new
style even more. What is the new-fashioned theology of those shallow
pates compared with orthodoxy but as dung-water compared with
dirty water? On this point we are at one, that our old religious
system is false; but I cannot say with you that it is a patchwork of
bunglers and half philosophers. I know nothing in the world upon
which human ingenuity has been more subtly exercised than upon
it. That religious system which is now offered in place of the old
is a patchwork of bunglers and half philosophers.</q> He is offended
at men hanging the concerns of eternity on the spider's thread of
external evidences, and so he was delighted to hurl the Wolfenbüttel
<q>Fragments</q> at the heads of theologians and the Hamburg pastor
Goeze, whom he loaded with contumely and scorn. Thoroughly
characteristic too is the saying in the <q><foreign rend='italic'>Duplik</foreign></q>: That if God holding
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
in his right hand all truth, and in his left hand the search after
truth, subject to error through all eternity, were to offer him his
choice, he would humbly say, <q>Father the left, for pure truth is
indeed for thee alone.</q> In his <q><emph>Nathan</emph></q> only Judaism and Mohammedanism
are represented by truly noble and ideal characters, while
the chief representative of Christianity is a gloomy zealot, and the
conclusion of the parable is that all three rings are counterfeit. In
another work he views revelation as one of the stages in <q>The Education
of the Human Race,</q> which loses its significance as soon as its
purpose is served. In familiar conversation with Jacobi he frankly
declared his acceptance of the doctrine of Spinoza: Ἕν καὶ πᾶν.<note place='foot'>Stahr, <q>Lessing: his Life and Works,</q> translated by G. Evans.
2 vols. Boston, 1866. Sime, <q>Lessing, his Life and Writings.</q> 2 vols.
London, 1877. Zimmern, <q>G. E. Lessing: his Life and Works.</q>
London, 1878. Smith, <q>Lessing as a Theologian,</q> in the <emph>Theological
Review</emph>, July, 1868.</note>
<emph>Wieland</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1733-1813, soon turned from his youthful zeal for ecclesiastical
orthodoxy to the popular philosophy of the cultured man of
the world. <emph>Herder</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1744-1803, with his enthusiastic appreciation
of the poetical contents of the Bible, especially of the Old Testament,
was not slow to point out the insipidity of its ordinary treatment.
<emph>Goethe</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1749-1832, profoundly hated the vandalism of neology,
delighted in <q>The Confessions of a Fair Soul</q> (<ref target='Section_172_Para_2'>§ 172, 2</ref>), had in earlier
years sympathy with the Herrnhuters, but in the full intellectual
vigour of his manhood thought he had no need of Christianity, which
offended him by its demand for renunciation of self and the world.
<emph>Schiller</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1759-1805, enthusiastically admiring everything noble,
beautiful and good, misunderstood Christianity, and introduced into
the hearts of the German people Kantian rationalism clothed in rich
poetic garb. His lament on the downfall of the gods of Greece, even
if not so intended by the poet himself, told not so much against
orthodox Christianity as against poverty-stricken deism, which
banished the God of Christianity from the world and set in his place
the dead forces of nature. And if indeed he really thought that for
religion's sake he should confess to no religion, he has certainly in
many profoundly Christian utterances given unconscious testimony
to Christianity.&mdash;The Jacobi philosophy of feeling found poetic interpreters
in <emph>Jean Paul Richter</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1763-1825, and <emph>Hebel</emph>, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1826, in
whom we find the same combination of pious sentiment which is drawn
toward Christianity and the sceptical understanding which allied
itself to the revolt against the common orthodoxy. <emph>J. H. Voss</emph>, a
rough, powerful Dutch peasant, who in his <q><foreign rend='italic'>Luise</foreign></q> sketched the ideal
of a brave rationalistic country parson, and, with the inexorable
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
rigour of an inquisitor, hunted down the night birds of ignorance and
oppression. But alongside of those children of the world stood two
genuine sons of Luther, <emph>Matthias Claudius</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1740-1815, and <emph>J. G.
Hamann</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1730-1788, the <q>Magus of the North</q> and the Elijah
of his age, of whom Jean Paul said that his commas were planetary
systems and his periods solar systems, to whom the philosopher
Hemsterhuis erected in the garden of Princess Gallitzin a tablet with
the inscription: <q>To the Jews a stumbling-block, to the Greeks foolishness.</q>
With them may also be named two noble sons of the
Reformed church, the physiognomist <emph>Lavater</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1741-1801, and the
devout dreamer, <emph>Jung-Stilling</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1740-1817. The famous historian,
<emph>John von Müller</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1752-1809, well deserves mention here, who more
than any previous historian made Christ the centre and summit of all
times; and also the no less famous statesman <emph>C. F. von Moser</emph>, the most
German of the Germans of this century, who, with noble Christian
heroism, in numerous political and patriotic tracts, battled against
the prevailing social and political vices of his age.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_171_Para_12'/>
12. The great Swiss educationist <emph>Pestalozzi</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1746-1827, assumed
toward the Bible, the church, and Christianity an attitude similar to
that of the philosopher of Königsberg. The conviction of the necessity
and wholesomeness of a biblical foundation in all popular education
was rooted in his heart, and he clearly saw the shallowness of the
popular philosophy, whether presented under the eccentric naturalism
of Rousseau or the bald utilitarianism of Basedow. His whole life
issued from the very sanctuary of true Christianity, as seen in his
self-sacrificing efforts to save the lost, to strengthen the weak, and to
preach to the poor by word and deed the gospel of the all-merciful God
whose will it is that all should be saved. He began his career as an
educationist in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1775 by receiving into his house deserted beggar
children, and carried on his experiments in his educational institutions
at Burgdorf till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1798, and at Isserten till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1804. His writings,
which circulated far and wide, gained for his methods recognition and
high approval.<note place='foot'>Russell, <q>A Short Account of the Life and History of Pestalozzi,</q>
based on De Guemp's <q><foreign rend='italic'>L'Histoire de Pestalozzi</foreign>.</q> London, 1888. To
be followed by a complete English translation of De Guemp's work.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_172'/>
<head>§ 172. Church Life in the Period of the
<q>Illumination.</q></head>

<p>
The ancient faith of the church had even during this age
of prevailing unbelief its seven thousand who refused to bow
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
the knee to Baal. The German people were at heart firmly
grounded in the Christianity of the Bible and the church, and
where the pulpit failed had their spiritual wants supplied by
the devout writings of earlier days. Where the modern
vandalism of the <q>Illumination</q> had mutilated and watered
down the books of praise, the old church songs lingered in
the memories of fathers and mothers, and were sung with
ardour at family worship. For many men of culture, who
were more exposed to danger, the Society of the Brethren
afforded a welcome refuge. But even among the most
accomplished of the nation many stood firmly in the old
paths. Lavater and Stilling, Haller and Euler, the two
Mosers, father and son, John von Müller and his brother J. G.
Müller, are not by any means the only, but merely the best
known, of such true sons of the church. In Württemberg
and Berg, where religious life was most vigorous, religious
sects were formed with new theological views which made
a deep impression on the character and habits of the people.
Also toward the end of the century an awakened zeal in
home and foreign missions was the prelude of the glorious
enterprises of our own days.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_172_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Hymnbook and Church Music.</emph>&mdash;Klopstock, followed by Cramer
and Schlegel, introduced the vandalism of altering the old church
hymns to suit modern tastes and views. But a few, like Herder and
Schubert, raised their voices against such philistinism. The <q>Illuminist</q>
alterations were unutterably prosaic, and the old pathos and
poetry of the sixteenth and seventeenth century hymns were ruthlessly
sacrificed. The spiritual songs of the noble and pious Gellert
are by far the best productions of this period.&mdash;<emph>Church Music</emph> too now
reached its lowest ebb. The old chorales were altered into modern
forms. A multitude of new, unpopular melodies, difficult of comprehension,
with a bald school tone, were introduced; the last trace of
the old rhythm disappeared, and a weary monotony began to prevail,
in which all force and freshness were lost. As a substitute, secular
preludes, interludes, and concluding pieces were brought in. The
people often entered the churches during the playing of operatic
overtures, and were dismissed amid the noise of a march or waltz.
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
The church ceased to be the patron and promoter of music; the theatre
and concert room took its place. The opera style thoroughly depraved
the oratorio. For festival occasions, cantatas in a purely
secular, effeminate style were composed. A true ecclesiastical music
no longer existed, so that even Winterfeld closed his history of church
music with Seb. Bach. It was, if possible, still worse with the
mass music of the Roman Catholic church. Palestrina's earnest and
capable school was completely lost sight of under the sprightly and
frivolous opera style, and with the organ still more mischief was done
than in the Protestant church.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_172_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Religious Characters.</emph>&mdash;The pastor of Ban de la Roche in Steinthal
of Alsace, <q>the saint of the Protestant church,</q> <emph>J. Fr. Oberlin</emph>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1740-1826, deserves a high place of honour. During a sixty years'
pastorate <q>Father Oberlin</q> raised his poverty-stricken flock to a
position of industrial prosperity, and changed the barren Steinthal
into a patriarchal paradise. The same may be said of a noble Christian
woman of that age, <emph>Sus. Cath. von Klettenberg</emph>, Lavater's <q>Cordata,</q>
Goethe's <q>Fair Soul,</q> whose genuine confessions are wrought into
<q><emph>Wilhelm Meister</emph></q> the centre of a beautiful Christian circle in
Frankfort, where the young Goethe received religious impressions
that were never wholly forgotten.&mdash;Community of religious yearnings
brought together pious Protestants and pious Catholics. The Princess
von Gallitzin, her chaplain Overberg, and minister Von Fürstenberg
formed a noble group of earnest Catholics, for whom the ardent
Lutheran Hamann entertained the warmest affection.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_172_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Religious Sects.</emph>&mdash;In Württemberg there arose out of the pietism
of Spener, with a dash of the theosophy of Oetinger, the party of the
<emph>Michelians</emph>, so named from a layman, Michael Hahn, whose writings
show profound insight into the truths of the gospel. He taught the
doctrine of a double fall, in consequence of which he depreciated
though he did not forbid marriage; of a restitution of all things;
while he subordinated justification to sanctification, the Christ for us
to the Christ in us, etc. As a reaction against this extreme arose the
<emph>Pregizerians</emph>, who laid exclusive stress upon baptism and justification,
declared assurance and heart-breaking penitence unnecessary, and
imparted to their services as much brightness and joy as possible.
Both sects spread over Württemberg and still exist, but in their common
opposition to the destructive tendencies of modern times, they
have drawn more closely together. In their chiliasm and restitutionism
they are thoroughly agreed.&mdash;The <emph>Collenbuschians</emph> in Canton Berg
propounded a dogmatic system in which Christ empties Himself of His
divine attributes, and assumes with sinful flesh the tendencies to sin
that had to be fought against, the sufferings of Christ are attributed
to the wrath of Satan, and His redemption consists in His overcoming
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
Satan's wrath for us and imparting His Spirit to enable us to do works
of holiness. The most distinguished adherents of Collenbusch were
the two Hasencamps and the talented Bremen pastor Menken.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_172_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Rationalistic <q>Illumination</q> outside of Germany.</emph>&mdash;In Amsterdam,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1791, a <emph>Restored Lutheran Church</emph> or <emph>Old Light</emph> was organized
on the occasion of the intrusion of a rationalistic pastor. It
now numbers eight Dutch congregations with 14,000 adherents and
11 pastors. Under the name of <emph>Christo Sacrum</emph> some members of the
French Reformed church at Delft, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1797, founded a denomination
which received adherents of all confessions, holding by the divinity of
Christ and His atonement, and treating all confessional differences as
non-essential and to be held only as private opinions. In their public
services they adopted mainly the forms of the Anglican episcopal
church. Though successful at first, it soon became rent by the incongruity
of its elements. In England the dissenters and Methodists
provided a healthy protest against the lukewarmness of the State
church. In <emph>William Cowper</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1731-1800, we have a noble and
brilliant poet of high lyrical genius, whose life was blasted by the
terrorism of a predestinarian doctrine of despair and the religious
melancholy produced by Methodistic agonies of soul.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_172_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Missionary Societies and Missionary Enterprise.</emph>&mdash;In order to arouse
interest in the idea of a grand union for practical Christian purposes,
the Augsburg elder, John Urlsperger, travelled through England,
Holland, and Germany. The Basel Society for Spreading Christian
Truth, founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1780, was the first-fruits of his zeal, and branches
were soon established throughout Switzerland and Southern Germany.
The Basel Bible Society was founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1804, and the Missionary
Society in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1816.&mdash;At a meeting of English Baptist preachers at
Kettering, in Northamptonshire, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1792, William Carey was the
means of starting the Baptist Missionary Society. Carey was himself
its first missionary. He sailed for India in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1793, and founded the
Serampore Mission in Bengal. The work of the society has now spread
over the East and West Indies, the Malay Archipelago, South Africa,
and South America. A popular preacher, Melville Horne, who had
been himself in India, published <q>Letters on Missions,</q> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1794,
in which he earnestly counselled a union of all true Christians for the
conversion of the heathen. In response to this appeal a large number
of Christians of all denominations, mostly Independents, founded in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1795, the London Missionary Society, and in the following year
the first missionary ship, <emph>The Duff</emph>, under Captain Wilson, sailed for
the South Seas with twenty-nine missionaries on board. Its operations
now extend to both Indies, South Africa, and North America; but its
chief hold is in the South Seas. In the Society Islands the missionaries
wrought for sixteen years without any apparent result, till at last
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
King Pomare II. of Tahiti sought baptism as the first-fruits of their
labours. A victory gained over a pagan reactionary party in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1815 secured complete ascendency to Christianity. The example of
the London Society was followed by the founding of two Scottish
societies in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1796 and a Dutch society in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1797, and the Church
Missionary Society in London in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1799, for the English possessions
in Africa, Asia, etc. The Danish Lutheran (<ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>§ 167, 9</ref>) and the Herrnhut
(<ref target='Section_168_Para_11'>§ 168, 11</ref>) societies still continued their operations.<note place='foot'>Marshman, <q>Life and Times of Marshman, Carey, and Ward.</q>
2 vols. London, 1859. Smith, <q>Life of William Carey.</q> London,
1886. Wilson, <q>Missionary Voyage of the Ship <emph>Duff</emph>.</q> London, 1799.
Morison, <q>Fathers and Founders of the London Missionary Society,</q>
London, 1844.</note>&mdash;Continuation,
§§ <ref target='Section_183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Section_184'>184</ref>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fourth Section. Church History Of The Nineteenth Century.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. General and Introductory.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_173'/>
<head>§ 173. Survey of Religious Movements of Nineteenth
Century.</head>

<p>
A reaction had set in against the atheistic spirit of the French
Revolution, and the victories of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1813, 1815, encouraged the pious
in their Christian confidence. Princes and people were full of gratitude
to God. Alexander I., Francis I., and Frederick William III.,
representing the three principal churches, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1815, after the
political situation had been determined by the Congress of Vienna,
formed <q>the Holy Alliance,</q> a league of brotherly love for mutual
defence and maintenance of peace, to which all the European princes
adhered with the exception of the pope, the sultan, and the king
of England. Through Metternich's arts it ultimately degenerated
into an instrument of repression and tyranny.&mdash;Incongruous elements
were present everywhere. The restoration of the papacy in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1814 had given a new impulse to ultramontanism, as did also the
Reformation centenary of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1817 to Protestantism; while supernaturalism
and pietism prevailing in the Lutheran and Reformed
churches led to renewed attempts at union. Old sects were strengthened
and new sects arose. Pantheism, materialism, and atheism, as
well as socialism and communism, without concealment attacked Christianity;
while pauperism and vagabondage, on the one hand, and the
Stock Exchange swindling of capitalists, on the other, spread moral
consumption through all classes of society. The ultramontanes, led
by the Jesuits, reasserted the most arrogant claims of the papacy.
The climax was reached when Pius IX. obtained a decree of council
affirming his infallibility, while by the Nemesis of history the royal
crown was torn from his head.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 174. Nineteenth Century Culture in Relation
to Christianity and the Church.</head>

<p>
Down to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840, when zeal for it began to abate, philosophy
exercised an important influence on the religious
development of the age, both in the departments of science
and of life. While rationalism was not able to transcend
the standpoint of Kant, the other theological tendencies
were more or less determined formally, and even materially
by the philosophical movements of this period. Alongside
of philosophy, literature, itself to a great extent coloured
by contemporary philosophy, exerted a powerful influence
on the religious opinions of the more cultured among the
people. The sciences, too, came into closer relations, partly
friendly, partly hostile, to Christianity; and art in some of
its masterpieces paid a noble tribute to the church.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The German Philosophy</emph> (§ 170, 10).&mdash;<emph>Fries</emph>, whose philosophy was
Kantian rationalism, modified by elements borrowed from Jacobi,
influenced such theologians as De Wette. <emph>Schelling</emph>, in his <q>Philosophy
of Identity,</q> had advanced from Fichte's idealism to a pantheistic
naturalism. From Fichte he had learned that this world is
nothing without spirit; but while Fichte recognised this world, the
<emph>non-ego</emph>, as reality only in so far as man seizes upon it and penetrates
it by his spirit, and so raises it into real being, Schelling regards
spirit as nothing else than the life of nature itself. In the lower
stages of this nature-life spirit is still slumbering and dreaming, but
in man it has attained unto consciousness. The nature-life as a
whole, or the world-soul, is God; man is the reflex of God and the
world in miniature, a microcosmos. In the world's development God
comes into objective being and unfolds his self-consciousness; Christianity
is the turning point in the world's history; its fundamental
dogmas of revelation, trinity, incarnation, and redemption are suggestive
attempts to solve the world's riddle. Schelling's poetic
view of the world penetrated all the sciences, and gave to them a new
impulse. Though hateful to the old rationalists, this system found
ardent admirers among the younger theologians. As Schelling to
Fichte, so <emph>Hegel</emph> was attached to Schelling, and wrought his pantheistic
naturalism into a pantheistic spiritualism. Not so much in
the life of nature as in the thinking and doing of the human spirit,
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
the divine revelation is the unfolding of the divine self-consciousness
from non-being into being. Judaism and Christianity are progressive
stages of this process; Judaism stands far below classic paganism; but
in Christianity we have the perfect religion, to be developed into
the highest form of philosophy. The Protestant church doctrine
was now again accorded the place of honour. Marheincke developed
Lutheran orthodoxy into a system of speculative theology based on
Hegelian principles; while Göschel infused into it a pietist spirit,
which made many hail the new departure as the long-sought reconciliation
of theology and philosophy. But after Hegel's death in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1831 the condition of matters suddenly changed. His school
split into an orthodox wing following the master's ecclesiastical
tendencies, and a heterodox wing which deified the human spirit.
Strauss, Bauer, and Feuerbach led this heterodox party in theology,
and Ruge in reference to social, æsthetic, and political questions.
Persecuted by the state in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1843, the Young Hegelians joined the
rationalists, whom they had before sneered at as <q>antediluvian
theologians.</q> <emph>Schelling</emph>, who had been silent for almost thirty years,
took Hegel's chair in Berlin as his decided opponent in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1841,
and with his dualistic doctrine of potencies, from which he finally
advanced to a Christian gnosticism, obtained a temporary influence
among the younger theologians. He died at the baths of Ragaz in
Switzerland in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1854. He flashed for a moment like a meteor,
and as suddenly his light was quenched.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_2'/>
2. The domination of the Hegelian philosophy was overthrown by
the split in the school and the radicalism of the adherents of the left
wing, and Schelling in the second stage of his philosophical development
had not succeeded in founding any proper school of his own.
A group of younger philosophers, with I. H. Fichte at their head,
starting from the Hegelian dialectic, have striven to free philosophy
from the reproach of pantheism and to develop a speculative theism
in touch with historical Christianity. Other members of this school
are Weisse, Braniss, Chalibæus, Ulrici, Wirth, Romang, etc.&mdash;<emph>Herbart</emph>
renounces all that philosophers from Fichte senior to Fichte junior
had done, and declares the metaphysical end of their systems beyond
the horizon of philosophy, which must limit itself to the province
of experience. His realism is in diametrical opposition to Hegel's
idealism. Toward Christianity his philosophy occupies a position
of indifference. Influenced by Kant's theory of knowledge as well
as by the Fichte-Schelling-Hegel idealism and Herbart's realism,
with an infusion of Leibnitz's monad doctrine, <emph>Hermann Lotze</emph> of
Göttingen has, since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1844, set forth a system of <q>teleological
idealism.</q> He develops his metaphysical principles from what we
have by immediate experience internal and external, and the invariability
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
of the causal mechanism in everything that happens in
the inner and outer world he explains as the realizing of moral
purposes.&mdash;<emph>Schopenhauer's</emph> philosophy, which only in the later years
of his life (died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860) began to attract attention, is in spirit
utterly opposed to the religion and ethics of Christianity. Its task
is to describe <q>The World as Will and Idea</q>; first at that stage of
entering into visibility which is represented in man does will, the
thing-in-itself, become joined with idea, and makes its appearance
now with it over against the world as a conscious subject. But since
idea is regarded as a pure illusion of the will, this leads to a pessimism
which takes absolute despair as the only legitimate moral principle.
<emph>E. von Hartmann</emph> went still further in the same direction in his
<q>Philosophy of the Unconscious,</q> published in 1869, of which an
English translation in three vols. appeared in 1884. He identifies
the will with matter and idea with spirit, demands in addition to
the absolute despair of the individual here and hereafter, the complete
surrender of the personality to the world-process in order to
the attainment of its end, the annihilation of the world. This
dissolution of the world consists in the complete withdrawal of the
will into the absolute as the only unconscious, so that at last the
wrong and misery of being produced by the irrational will are
abolished in this withdrawal. From this philosophical standpoint
Hartmann attempted in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1874 to take Christianity to pieces,
showing some favour to Vatican Catholicism, but pouring out the
vials of his wrath upon Protestantism. His <q>religion of the future</q>
consists in a yearning for freedom from all the burden and misery
of being and share in the world-process by relapsing into the blessedness
of non-being.&mdash;In France, England, and America much favour
has been shown to the atheistic-sensual Positivism of <emph>Aug. Comte</emph>,
which, excluding every form of theology and morals, requires only
the so-called exact sciences as the object of philosophy. On his
later notions of a <q>religion of humanity,</q> see <ref target='Section_210_Para_1'>§ 210, 1</ref>. On essentially
similar lines proceeds <emph>Herbert Spencer</emph>, in his <q>System of Synthetic
Philosophy,</q> to whose school also Darwin belonged. His followers
are styled agnostics, because they regard all knowledge of God and
divine things as absolutely impossible, and evolutionists, because
their master endeavours to construct all the sciences on the basis of
the evolution theory.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Sciences.</emph>&mdash;Schelling's profound theories were of all the more
significance from their not being restricted to the philosophical
strivings of his time, but inspiring the other sciences with the breath
of a new life. To the fullest extent the natural sciences exposed
themselves to this influence. There was not wanting indeed a certain
shadowy mysticism, to which especially the fancies of mesmeric
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
magnetism largely contributed; but this fog gradually cleared away,
and the Christian elements were purified from their pantheistic surroundings.
Steffens and Von Schubert taught that the divine book
of nature is to be regarded as the reflex and expansion of the divine
revelation in Scripture. The Hegelian philosophy, too, seemed at
first likely to infuse a Christian spirit into the other sciences. In
Göschel, at least, there was a thinker who imparted to jurisprudence
a Christian character, and to Christianity a juristic construction.
In other respects Hegel's philosophy in its application to the other
departments of science gave in many ways a predominance to an
abstruse dialectic tendency. Its adherents of the extreme left sought
to construct all sciences <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> from the pure idea, and at the
same time to root out from them the last vestiges of the Christian
spirit.
</p>

<p>
The greatest names in natural science, Copernicus, Kepler, Newton,
Haller, Davy, Cuvier, etc., are household words in Christian circles.
All these and many more were firmly convinced that there was no
conflict between their most brilliant discoveries and Christian truth.
In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1825 the Earl of Bridgwater founded a lectureship, and treatises
on the power, wisdom, and goodness of God as manifested in the
creation, have been written by Buckland, Chalmers, Whewell, Bell,
etc. It was otherwise in Germany. Even Schleiermacher, in his
<q>Letters to Lücke,</q> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1829, expressed his fears of the prophesied
overthrow of all Christian theories of the world by the incontrovertible
results of physical research, and Bretschneider in his <q>Letters
to a Statesman,</q> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830, proclaimed to the world without regret
that already what Schleiermacher only feared had actually come to
pass. Physicists, awakening from the glamour of the Schelling
nature philosophy, pronounced all speculation contraband, and declared
pure empiricism, the simple investigation of actual things,
the only permissible object of their labour. And although they
handed over to theologians and philosophers questions about spirit
in and over nature, as not belonging to their province, a younger
generation maintained that spirit was non-existent, because it could
not be discovered by the microscope and dissecting knife. Carl Vogt
defined thought to be a secretion of the brain, and Moleschott regarded
life as a mere mode of matter and man's existence after life
only as the manuring of the fields. Feuerbach proclaimed that <q>man
is what he eats,</q> and Buchner popularized these views into a gospel
for social democrats and nihilists. Oersted, the famous discoverer
of electro-magnetism, had sought <q>the spirit in nature,</q> but the
spirit which he found was not that of the Bible and the church.
The grandmaster of German scientific research, Alex. von Humboldt,
saw in the world a cosmos of noble harmony as a whole and in its
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
parts, but of Christian ideas in God's great book of nature he finds
no trace. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1859 the great English naturalist Darwin, died
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1882, introduced into the arena the theory of <q>Natural Selection,</q>
by means of which the modification and development of the few
primary animal forms through the struggle for existence and the
survival of the fittest by sexual selection is supposed, in millions,
perhaps milliards, of years, to have brought forth the present variety
and manifoldness of animal species. Multitudes of naturalists now
accept his theory of the descent of men and apes from a common
stem.&mdash;In <emph>Medicine</emph> De Valenti on the Protestant side, with pietistic
earnestness, maintains that Christian faith is a vehicle of healing
power; while a circle in Munich on the Catholic side make worship
of saints and the host a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>conditio sine qua non</foreign> of all medicine. A more
moderate attitude is assumed by the Roman Catholic Dr. Capellmann
of Aachen, in his <q>Pastoral Medicine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_4'/>
4. Of Christian <emph>Jurists</emph> we have, on the Protestant side, Stahl,
Savigny, Puchta, Jacobson, Richter, Meier, Scheuerl, Hinschius, etc.;
and on the Catholic side, Walther, Philipps, etc. Among <emph>Historians</emph>,
the greatest in modern times is Leopold von Ranke, who, with his
disciples, occupies a thoroughly Christian standpoint. There has
appeared, however, on the part of many Protestant historians, such
as Voigt, Leo, Mentzel, Vorreiter, Hurter, Gfroerer, etc., a tendency
in the most conspicuous manner to recognise and admire the brilliant
phenomena of mediæval Catholicism, even going to the length of
renouncing the vital principles of Protestantism, and glorifying a
Boniface, a Gregory VII., and an Innocent III., and characterizing
the Reformation as a revolution. Ultramontanes have been only too
ready to turn to their own use all such concessions, but show no inclination
to make similar admissions damaging to their side, so that
with them history consists rather in the abuse of everything Protestant
as vile and perfidious, instead of being a record of independent
research. Janssen of Frankfort stands out prominently above the
billows of the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign></q> (<ref target='Section_197'>§ 197</ref>), as the greatest master of this
ultramontane style of history making.&mdash;<emph>Geography</emph>, first raised to the
rank of a science by Carl Ritter, received from its great founder a
Christian impress and owes much of its development to the researches
of Christian missionaries. Finally, <emph>Philology</emph>, in the hands of Creuzer,
Görres, Sepp, etc., unfolds in a Christian spirit the religion and mythology
of classical paganism; and in the hands of Nägelsbach and
Lübker expounds the religious life of the ancient world in relation
to Christian truth.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>National Literature</emph> (<ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>§ 171, 11</ref>).&mdash;To some extent Goethe, but much
more decidedly the romantic school of poets, was attached to
Schelling's philosophy of nature. The romanticists developed a deep
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
religiousness of feeling, as shown in Novalis and La Motte Fouqué, and
violent opposition to rationalistic theology as shown in Tieck, which
in the case of Fr. Schlegel ran to the other extreme of moral frivolity
as seen in his <q>Lucinde.</q> The romantic school as thus represented by
Schlegel was joined by the party of Young Germany with its gospel
of the rehabilitation of the flesh. Its mouthpiece was the gifted poet
Heine. The pantheistic deification of nature by Schelling, and the
self-deification of the Hegelian school obtained poetic expression in
Leop. Schafer's <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Laienbrevier und Weltpriester</foreign>, as well as in Sallet's
<foreign rend='italic'>Laienevangelium</foreign>; while the sympathies of the young Hegelians with
the revolutionary movements gained utterance in the poems of
Herwegh, and in a more serious tone in those of Freiligrath. More
recently the views of the <foreign rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign> (<ref target='Section_180'>§ 180</ref>) have found their
poetical representative in Nic. Eichhorn, whose <q>Jesus of Nazareth,</q>
a tragical drama, 1880, deals with the life, works, and sufferings of
the <q>historical Christ,</q> after the style of free Protestant science, with
rich psychological analysis of the character in a brilliant imaginative
production. Though composed with a view to theatrical representation,
it has never yet been put on the stage.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_6'/>
6. The Christian element was present in the noble patriotic songs of
E. M. Arndt<note place='foot'>Baur, <q>Religious Life in Germany.</q> London, 1872, pp. 177-196.</note> and Max. von Schenkendorf much more distinctly than
in the romantic school. Enthusiasm in the struggle for freedom
awakened faith in the living God. Uhland's lovely lyrics, with their
enthusiasm for the present interests of the Fatherland, entitle him
to rank among patriotic poets, and their brilliant and profound
rendering of the old German legends places him in the romantic
school, which, however, in clearness and depth he leaves far behind.
Without being a distinctively Christian poet, his warm sympathy
with the life of the German people gives him a genuine interest in
the Christian religion. The same may be said of Rückert's highly
finished poems, which transplanted the fragrant flowers of oriental
sensuousness and contemplativeness into the garden of German poetry.
A more decided Christian consecration of poetic genius is seen in the
noble and beautiful lyrics of Emanuel Geibel, died 1884, the greatest
and most Christian of the secular poets of the present. Of those
ordinarily ranked as sacred poets may be named Knapp, Döring,
Spitta, Garve, Vict. Strauss, etc., who for the most part contributed
their sacred songs to Knapp's <q><foreign rend='italic'>Christoterpe</foreign></q> (1833-1853). A later
publication of equal merit, called the <q><foreign rend='italic'>Neue Christoterpe</foreign>,</q> has been
edited since 1880 by Kögel, Baur, and Frommel. But with all the
Christian depth and spirituality, freshness and warmth, which we
meet with in the productions of these Christian poets, none of them
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
has been able to rise to the noble simplicity, power, popular force,
and fitting them for church use, objectivity which are present in the
old evangelical church hymns. In this respect they all bear too conspicuously
the signature of their age, with its subjective tone and the
noise and turmoil of present conflicts. Of all modern poets, Rückert
alone approaches in his advent hymn the measure and spirit of the
old church song.&mdash;In the department of novels and romance there has
been shown an almost invariable hostility toward Christianity, religion
being either entirely avoided or held up to contempt by having
as its representatives, simpletons, hypocrites, or knaves.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_7'/>
7. In <emph>France</emph>, Chateaubriand in his <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Genie du Christianisme</foreign></q> pronounces
an eloquent eulogy on the half-pagan Christianity of the
Middle Ages. In another work he makes the representatives of
heathenism in the age of Constantine act like Homeric heroes, and
those of Christianity speak <q>like theologians of the age of Bossuet.</q>
Lamartine may be described as a Christian romanticist. Victor Hugo,
Balzac, George Sand, Sue, Dumas, etc., influenced by the Revolution,
developed an antichristian tendency; while naked naturalism, photographic
realism in depicting the lowest side of Parisian life, especially
adultery and prostitution, is represented by Flaubert, Daudet, De
Goncourt, Zola, etc.&mdash;In <emph>Italy</emph>, the amiable Manzoni gave noble expression
to Christian feeling in his <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Inni Sacri</foreign>,</q> and in his masterly
romance <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Promessi Sposi</foreign></q>; and the famous poet Silvio Pellico, in his
<q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>La mia Prigioni</foreign>,</q> affords a noble example of the sustaining power
of true religion during ten years' rigorous imprisonment in an Austrian
dungeon. The most gifted of modern Italian poets, Giacomo
Leopardi, sank into despairing pessimism, which expressed itself in
the domain of religion in biting satire and savage irony. Among
the poets of the present who, with glowing patriotism, not only
yearned for the deliverance and unity of Italy, but also lived to see
these accomplished, and have since given expression, though from
different political and religious standpoints, to the desire for the
reconciliation of the free united kingdom with the irreconcilable
church, the most distinguished, are Aleardi, Carducci, Imbriani,
Guercini, Cavalotti.&mdash;In <emph>Spain</emph>, Caecilia Böhl von Faber, although the
daughter of a German father, and educated in Germany, introduced,
under the name Fernan Caballero, the modern romance in a thoroughly
national Spanish style, and in a purely moral and catholic Christian
spirit. In the <emph>Flemish Provinces</emph>, Hendrik Conscience, the able novelist,
has described Flemish village life in a spirit fully in sympathy with
Christianity.&mdash;<emph>England</emph> had in Lord Byron a poet of the first rank,
who more than any other poet had experience in himself of the convulsions
and contradictions of his age. In powerful and impressive
tones he sets forth the unreconciled disharmonies of nature and of
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
human life. Incurable pain, despair, weariness of life, and hatred of
mankind, without hope, yet without desire for reconciliation, enthusiastic
admiration of the ancient world, passionate love of liberty and
titanic pride in human might mingle with scenes of grumbling,
misery, and profligacy. On the other hand, the rich and mostly solid
English novel literature is prevailingly inspired by a Christian spirit.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>Popular Education.</emph>&mdash;While the poetic national literature for the
most part found entrance only among the cultured and adult circles,
this age, almost as fond of writing as of reading, produced an
enormous quantity of books for the people and for children. But
only a few succeeded in catching the proper tone for the masses and
the youth, and still fewer supplied their readers with what was
genuinely pious. Pestalozzi's <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Lienhard und Gertrud</foreign>,</q> Hebel's <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Schatzkästlein</foreign>,</q>
and Tschokke's <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Goldmacherdorf</foreign>,</q> respected at least the
Christian feeling of the people, although they did not strengthen or
foster it. But, on the other hand, in recent years a number of writers
have appeared, thoroughly popular, and at the same time thoroughly
Christian, who, as popular poets and novelists, have become apostles
of Christian views, morals, and customs to the people. The most
distinguished of these are Jeremiah Gotthelf (Albert Bitzius, died
1854), whose <q>Kate the Grandmother</q> was translated in the <emph>Sunday
Magazine</emph> for 1865, Von Horn, Carl Stöber, Wildenhahn, Nathusius,
Frommel, Weitbrecht, etc. In the Catholic church Albanus Stoltz,
died 1883, developed a wonderful power of popular composition,
which, however, he subsequently put at the service of a fanatical
ultramontanism, and so sacrificed much of its nobility and worth.
From the enormous mass of children's books only extremely few attain
their aim. In the front rank stands the brilliant patriarch of Christian
tale writing, Von Schubert, died 1860. After him are Barth, the
author of <q>Poor Henry,</q> Stöber, and the Swiss Spyri, and the Catholic
Christian Schmid, author of the <q>Easter Eggs.</q>&mdash;The <emph>Public Schools</emph>,
especially under Dinter (died 1831), member of the consistory and
schoolboard of Königsberg, were for a long time nurseries of the
tame, flat, and self-satisfied rationalism of the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>ancien régime</foreign>; but since
1830, and more particularly in consequence of the violent agitations
of the seminary director Diesterweg, who died in 1866, put to silence
in 1847, but still for his work in connexion with education always
highly respected, many of the teachers took a higher flight in the
naturalistic-democratic direction. By word and pen Diesterweg
carried on a propaganda in favour of a free and liberal education for
the people. His disciples, wanting his earnest Christian spirit, carried
out recklessly his radical tendencies, and now the Christian faith has
no more persistent foes than the teachers of the public schools. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870, a Teachers' Association in Vienna gave a vote of 6,000 in
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
favour of radicalism. At a Hamburg meeting in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1872 of 5,100
teachers, progress was shown by individuals raising their voices in
defence of Christianity, which, however, were generally drowned in
shrieks and hisses. A Teachers' Evangelical Association held its ninth
assembly at Hamburg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1881 with 1,500 members. Christian
opinions are now ably represented in schools, educational journals,
and literature. A burning question at present is whether the national
school should be preferred to the denominational school. Liberals in
church and state say it should; conservatives say it should not; while
both parties think their views supported by the experience of the past.
The Prussian minister of education, Falk, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1872-1879, firmly insisted
upon the development of the national system, but his successors
Von Puttkamer and Von Gossler reverted to the denominational
system. The German Evangelical School Congress of Hamburg in
October, 1882, demanded that both elementary and secondary schools
should have a confessional character.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>Art.</emph>&mdash;The intellectual quickening called forth with the opening
of the new century imparted new spirit and life to the cultivation
of the arts. Winckelmann, died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1768, had opened the way to
an understanding of pagan classical art, and romanticism awakened
appreciation of and enthusiasm for mediæval Christian art. The
greatest masters of <emph>Architecture</emph> were Schinckel, Klenze, and Heideloff.
The foundation stone of the final part of the Cologne cathedral was
laid by a Protestant king, Frederick William IV., in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1842, and
the work was finished by a Protestant builder in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1880. <emph>Statuary</emph>
had three great masters, who gave expression to profound Christian
ideas in bronze and marble, the Italian Canova, the German Dannecker,
and greatest of all, the Dane Thorwaldsen, whose Christ and
the Apostles and other works form a main attraction to visitors in
Copenhagen. Three younger German masters of the art, who have
heired their fame, are Rauch, Rietschl, and Drake.&mdash;In <emph>Painting</emph> too a
new era now began. A group of gay German artists in Rome, with
Overbeck at their head, formed a Society in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1813, and mostly
became perverts to Romanism. Peter Cornelius, the ablest of the
school, himself born a Catholic, answered his friends' request to place
Luther in a picture of the last judgment, in hell: <q>Yes, but with the
Bible in his hands and the devils trembling before him;</q> and in a
subsequent picture of the judgment, he gave the German reformer
his place among the saints in heaven. His pupil, Julius Schnorr von
Karolsfeld is well known by his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bibel in Bildern</foreign>.</q> Ludwig Richter,
the Albert Dürer of the nineteenth century and creator of the modern
woodcut, has filled German houses with his artistic and poetic
creations, which breathe of God, nature, and the family fireside.
The Frenchman, Gustave Doré of Strassburg, has also illustrated the
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
Bible in a manner worthy of ranking alongside of Schnorr, though a
characteristically French striving for effect is everywhere discernible.&mdash;<emph>Painted
Glass</emph> (§ 104, 14) for church windows had during the
eighteenth century passed almost wholly out of use, but again in the
nineteenth came into favour, and was made at Dresden, Nuremberg,
and Munich. The most eminent artist in this department was
Ainmiller of Munich, specimens of whose workmanship are to be seen
in all parts of the world.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_174_Para_10'/>
10. <emph>Music and the Drama.</emph>&mdash;In Vienna the three great masters of
musical composition, Mozart, Haydn, and Beethoven, produced in the
department of sacred music some of their noblest works. Mendelssohn,
in his St. Paul and Elijah and in his Psalms, sought to reproduce the
power and truth of the simple word of God. An early death prevented
him giving expression to his ideal of Christ in music. The Hungarian
virtuoso Liszt sacrifices sacred calmness and dignity to theatrical effect.
His son-in-law, Richard Wagner, inspired by Schopenhauer's philosophy,
a richly endowed poet and composer, proclaimed by his followers
as the Messiah of the music of the future, going back to mediæval
legend, has produced a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quasi</foreign>-Christian musical drama, in which the
gospel of pessimism takes the place of the gospel of the grace of God.&mdash;Quite
different is the Passion Play of the Bavarian village Oberammergau,
which is a reproduction of the mediæval mysteries (§ 115, 12).
It originated in a vow made in 1633 on the occasion of a plague which
visited the place, and is repeated every ten years on the Sundays
from the end of May to the middle of September. The history of the
Saviour's passion is here represented with interludes from Messianic
Old Testament passages explained by a chorus like that of the classical
tragedy, with appropriate scenery, drapery, and musical accompaniment.
In the presence of an immense concourse of strangers for
whose accommodation a large amphitheatre was been built, almost
all the villagers, men, women, and children, take part in the performance
and show rare artistic power. The text of the drama for the
most part agrees with the gospel narrative, only occasionally interspersed
with legend, and quite free from ultramontane hagiology and
mariolatry. The performance of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1850, and still more that of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1880, attracted crowds of pilgrims and tourists to the quiet and
remote valley. An independent exhibition, falling little behind the
original in the artistic character of its composition and production,
was given, in 1883, on the Sundays of July and August in the
Tyrolese village of Brixlegg, and was visited by similar crowds.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 175. Intercourse and Negotiations between the
Churches.</head>

<p>
Protestants could recognise, as Catholics could not, elements
of truth and beauty in the creeds of their opponents.
When a peaceful and conciliatory spirit was shown by
individual Catholic clergymen, it was the occasion of
suspicion and persecution on the part of the old Romish
party. Schemes of union were entertained by the Old
Catholics (<ref target='Section_190'>§ 190</ref>), and negotiations were entered on by the
Greek Orthodox church, on the one hand, and the Roman
Catholic and Anglican churches, on the other, but in both
cases without any practical result. On the union negotiations
between the different Protestant sects, see <ref target='Section_178'>§ 178</ref>; and
on the Prusso-Anglican bishopric of Jerusalem, see <ref target='Section_184_Para_8'>§ 184, 8</ref>.
Of the numerous conversions from Protestantism to
Catholicism and from Catholicism to Protestantism, we can
here mention only such as have excited public interest in
some special way.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_175_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Romanizing Tendencies among Protestants.</emph>&mdash;Not only in England,
where an important high-church party embraced a more than half-Catholic
Puseyism (<ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>§ 202, 2</ref>), but even in Protestant Germany a
Romanizing current set in on many sides. A taste for the romantic,
artistic, historical (§ 174, <ref target='Section_174_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>9</ref>, <ref target='Section_174_Para_4'>4</ref>), as well as feudalist-aristocratic and
hyper-Lutheran ecclesiastical tendencies led the way in this direction.
Many sought rest in the bosom of the church <q>where alone salvation
is found,</q> while others, too deeply rooted in evangelical truth,
bewailed the loss of <q>noble and venerable</q> institutions in the worship,
life, and constitution of the church, but were unable to accept
the various unevangelical accretions which made void the doctrine of
justification by faith alone. This was the position of Löhe of Neuendettelsau,
in point of doctrine a strict Lutheran, who published a
selection of Catholic legends as patterns of self-denial for his deaconesses,
wished to restore anointing of the sick, etc. Some Protestant
pastors expressed warm sympathy with the Pope during his misfortunes
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860, and approved of the continuance of the papacy
and the pope's temporal dominion. A conference of Catholics (Count
Stolberg, Dr. Michelis, etc.) and Protestants (Leo, Bindewald, etc.) at
Erfurt in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860, on the basis of a common recognition of the moral
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
advantages of the papacy, sought to bring about a union of the
churches. Still more remarkable is the story told by the Old Catholic
professor Friedrich. Just before the opening of the Vatican Council,
certain evangelical pastors of Saxony wrote letters to Bishop Martin of
Paderborn, which Friedrich himself read, urging that at the council
permission should be given to priests to marry and to give the cup
in the communion to the laity, and promising that in that case they
themselves and many like-minded pastors would join the Romish
church. That the letters were written and received is unquestionable;
but it is doubtful whether folly and imbecility or a wish to
hoax and mystify, directed the pen. The writer or writers, as the
examination before the consistory of the locality proved, are not to
be sought among the pastors whose names are appended. How far
the Protestant ultra-conservative reactionary party goes with the
ultramontanes and how far it would aid the overthrow and undermining
of the Protestant state and evangelical church, is shown by
the conduct of the Privy Councillor and Chief Justice Ludwig von
Gerlach (<ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>§ 176, 1</ref>), who, in 1872, in the Prussian House of Representatives,
took his place among the ultramontane party of the centre,
hostile to the empire and friendly to the Poles, and in his pamphlet
<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kaiser und Papst</foreign></q> of 1872 described the new German empire as an
incarnate antichrist. Also the Lutheran Guelphs of Hanover are
zealous supporters of all the demands of the centre in the Prussian
parliament and in the German Reichstag.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_175_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Attitude of Catholicism toward Protestantism.</emph>&mdash;Every Catholic
bishop has still on assuming office to take the oath, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hæreticos pro
posse persequar</foreign>. The Jesuits, restored in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814, soon pervaded
every section with their intolerant spirit. The huge lie that Protestantism
is in matters of State as well as of church essentially
revolutionary, while Catholicism is the bulwark of the State against
revolution and democracy, was affirmed with such audacity that even
Protestant statesmen believed it. The Roman Jesuit Perrone (<ref target='Section_191_Para_9'>§ 191, 9</ref>)
taught the Catholic youth in a controversial Italian catechism that
<q>they should feel a creeping horror come over them at the mere
mention of the word Protestantism, more even than when a murderous
attack was made upon them, for Protestantism and its defenders are
in the religious and moral world just the same as the plague and
plague-stricken are in the physical world, and in all lands Protestants
are the scum of all that is vile and immoral,</q> etc. In a pastoral of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1855, Von Ketteler, Bishop of Mainz, compared the Germans, who
by the Reformation rent the unity of the church, to the Jews who
crucified the Messiah. Romish prelates have vied with one another in
their abuse of Protestants and Protestantism. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1881, Leo XIII.
speaking of the spread of Russian nihilism, charged Protestant
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
missionaries with spreading the dominion of the prince of darkness.
Prof. Hohoff of Paderborn, in his <q>Hist. Studies on Protestantism and
Socialism,</q> Paderb., 1881, reiterated the accusation: <q>Yes, it is so,
Protestantism has begotten atheism, materialism, scepticism, nihilism.
The Reformation was the murderer of all science, the greatest foe
of culture and learning, and the falsifier of all history....
Melanchthon's <foreign rend='italic'>Loci</foreign> may be styled the most unscientific production in
the domain of dogmatics.... Yes, the Reformation has proved
a prime source of superstition, a step backward in the history of
civilization.... The Catholic church has been the champion of
conscience, reason, and freedom.... No one is thoroughly capable
of judging historical facts without prejudice as the believing Catholic
Christian.</q>&mdash;But while the vast majority of Catholic writers thus abuse
Protestantism, others like Seltmann of Eberswald seek to win over
to the ranks of the Romish church those who can be befooled by fair
speeches. The <q>Protestant</q> correspondents in Seltmann's periodical
write under the cloak of anonymity.&mdash;In Spain the Reformation was
long attributed to the Augustinians, who were jealous of the Dominicans
as the only dispensers of indulgences, and to Luther's desire to marry;
but the poet Nuñez de Arca in his <q><foreign rend='italic'>Vision de Fray Martin</foreign>,</q> attributed
it to the corruption of the church and papacy of its time, and regarded
with sympathy the spiritual struggles of the reformer. Though as
a good Catholic he concludes his poem with the ban of the church
against Luther, he yet describes him as a just and well-deserving
man.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_175_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Romish Controversy.</emph>&mdash;In the beginning of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1872 the Waldensian
Professor Sciarelli published as a challenge the thesis that
the Apostle Peter never set foot in Rome, and Pius IX. with childlike
simplicity gave his consent to a public disputation, which came off at
Rome on 9th and 10th February. Three Protestant champions, with
Sciarelli at their head, were confronted by three Catholics, headed by
Fabiani, before 125 auditors admitted by ticket. Both sides claimed
the victory; but the shorthand reports were more widely read through
Italy than could be agreeable to the papal court.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_175_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Roman Catholic Union Schemes.</emph>&mdash;While American Protestant
missionaries strove zealously for the conversion of the schismatical
Eastern Churches, Rome with equal diligence but little success
endeavoured to win over these and the orthodox Greeks to her own
communion. There was great joy over the conversion of the <emph>Bulgarians</emph>
to Romanism in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860. Taking advantage of a national movement
for the restoration of a patriarchate independent of Constantinople
(<ref target='Section_207_Para_3'>§ 207, 3</ref>), some French Jesuits succeeded in persuading a small
number of malcontents to agree to a union with Rome. In 1861 the
pope consecrated an old Bulgarian priest, Jos. Sokolski, archbishop
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
of the united Bulgarian church. Very soon, however, he and almost
all his followers returned to their allegiance to the Greek Orthodox
church. Leo XIII. in his <emph>encyclical</emph> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1880, by giving conspicuous
honour to Cyril and Methodius, and uttering kind sentiments about
the Christian church in the East, and conferring high rank on dignitaries
of the Eastern church, seeks to smooth the way for a union of
the two great churches.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_175_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Greek Orthodox Union Schemes.</emph>&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1867 the Archbishop of
Canterbury addressed a letter to the Patriarch of Constantinople and
the whole Eastern church, to open the way to a common understanding
and union of the churches, sending a modern Greek translation of the
Book of Common Prayer, and asking their assistance at the consecration
of an Anglican church at Constantinople. The patriarch Gregorius
granted this request, and answered the letter in a friendly manner,
passing over the Anglican's warnings against superstitious additions
to the doctrine, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> mariolatry, but characterizing all the contrary
doctrines of the Thirty-nine Articles as <q>very modern.</q> At the same
time vigorous measures were being taken with a similar object by
members of the Russian and of the Anglican churches. In 1870
Professor Overbeck of Halle undertook to act as intermediary in these
negotiations. He had in 1865 published, in answer to the papal
encyclical with syllabus of December 8th, 1864 (<ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>§ 185, 2</ref>), a tract with
the motto <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ex oriente lux</foreign>, in which he placed the claims of the Orthodox
eastern church before the Roman Catholic as well as Protestant. On
the opening of the Vatican Council in 1869 he advocated in a pamphlet
the breaking up of the papal church and the formation of Catholic
national churches. In North America Professor Bjerring, of the
Catholic seminary for priests at Baltimore, took the same position.
In March, 1871, he went to St. Petersburg, was there ordained as an
Orthodox priest, and on his return to New York instituted a Sunday
service in the English language according to the Greek rite. Of any
further advance in this direction of union nothing is known.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_175_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Old Catholic Union Schemes.</emph>&mdash;Döllinger (<ref target='Section_191_Para_5'>§ 191, 5</ref>) in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871 was
hopeful of a union not only with the Greek, but also with the Anglican
church, and similar hopes were entertained in England and Russia,
and distinguished representatives of both communions took part in
the Old Catholic congresses (<ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>§ 190, 1</ref>). On the invitation of Döllinger,
as president of the committee commissioned by the Freiburg Congress
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1874 to treat about union with the Anglican church,
forty friends of union from Germany, England, Denmark, France,
Russia, Greece, and America met in conference at Bonn. After a
lively debate the cleft between East and West was bridged over by
a compromise treating the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>filioque</foreign> as an unnecessary addition to the
Nicene symbol, and asserting that, however desirable a mutual understanding
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
on doctrinal questions might be, existing differences in
constitution, discipline, and worship presented no bar to union. The
Catholics presented the Anglicans with fourteen theses essential to
union, in which the anti-Protestant doctrines were for the most part
toned down, but transubstantiation distinctly asserted. Subsequent
conferences never got beyond these preliminaries. It was, however,
agreed that, in case of necessity, Anglicans and Old Catholics might
dispense the supper to one another.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_175_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Conversions.</emph>&mdash;The most famous converts of the century were
Hurter, the biographer of Innocent III., the Countess Ida von Hahn-Hahn,
writer of religious romances, Gfroerer, the church historian,
the radical Hegelian Daumer, the historian of ante-tridentine theology
Hugo Lämmer, and Dr. Ed. Preuss, who had written against
the immaculate conception and for criminal conduct had to flee the
country. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1844 Carl Haas, a Protestant pastor, went over to
the Romish church, but the two new dogmas of Pius IX. led him to
study the works of Luther. He now returned to the Lutheran church,
vindicating his procedure in a treatise entitled, <q>To Rome, and from
Rome back again to Wittenberg, 1881.</q> Also the Mecklenburg
Lutheran pastor, Dr. A. Hager, who, after his conversion, had undertaken
the editorship of an ultramontane newspaper in Breslau in
1873, was obliged in a few years to resign the appointment. His return
to the evangelical church was being talked about, when he suddenly
died in 1883, after having received the last sacrament in the Catholic
church. The climax of abuse of Luther and the Lutheran church
was reached by the Hanoverian Evers, who had gone over in 1880;
in all his scandalous and vituperative writings he describes himself
on the title page as <q>formerly Lutheran pastor.</q> His mud-throwing,
however, was carried so far, that even the ultramontane <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Köln.
Volkszeitung</foreign> was constrained to advise him to write more decently.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_175_Para_8'/>
8. The Mortara affair of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1858 attracted special attention. The
eight-year old son of the Jew Mortara of Bologna was violently taken
from his parents to Rome because his Christian nurse said that two
years before, during a dangerous illness, she had baptized him. The
church answered the entreaties of the parents and the universal
outcry by saying that the sacrament had an indelible character, and
that the pope could not change the law. Again in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1864, the ten-year
old Jewish boy, Joseph Coën, apprentice weaver in Rome, was
decoyed by a priest to his cloister and there persuaded to receive
baptism. In vain his mother, the Jewish community, and even the
French ambassador, urged his restoration; and when, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870, the
temporal power of the pope was overthrown, the lad, now sixteen
years old, had himself become such a fanatical Catholic that he refused
to have anything to do with his mother as an unbeliever.
</p>

<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>

<p>
9. In the Tyrol in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830 there were numerous conversions from
Catholicism to Protestantism (<ref target='Section_198_Para_1'>§ 198, 1</ref>). A Catholic priest in Baden,
Henhöfer of Mühlhausen, influenced by the writings of Sailer and
Boos, went over to the Lutheran church in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1823, and continued
down to his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1862 a vigorous opponent of the prevailing
rationalism. Count Leopold von Seldnitzsky, formerly Prince-Bishop
of Breslau, felt obliged in 1840, in consequence of the conscientious
objections he had to perform his official duties toward church and
state during the ecclesiastico-political controversies of 1830 (<ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>§ 193, 1</ref>),
to resign his appointments. He was subsequently led in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1863,
through reading the Scriptures and Luther's works, after a sore struggle,
to join the evangelical Church. He devoted all his means to the
founding of Protestant educational institutions at Berlin and Breslau.
He died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871, in his eighty-fourth year. The proclamation by
the Vatican of the dogma of infallibility drove many pious and earnest
Catholics out of the Romish communion. Of these Carl von Richthofen,
Canon of Breslau, engages our special interest. Son of a pious
Lutheran mother, and trained up under Gossner's mild spiritual direction
(<ref target='Section_187_Para_2'>§ 187, 2</ref>), his gentle and deeply religious nature had attached itself
to the Roman Catholic church of his father only under the illusion
that the Romish doctrine of justification was not wholly irreconcilable
with the evangelical doctrine. He at first submitted to but
soon renounced the Vatican decree; was excommunicated by Archbishop
Förster, voluntarily resigned his emoluments; joined the Old Catholics
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1873, and the separated Old Lutherans in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1875. In the
following year he died a painful death from the explosion of a
petroleum lamp.&mdash;Upon the whole Rome has made most converts in
America and England; and she has suffered losses more or less severe
in France, Belgium, Ireland, Italy, Spain, and Bohemia.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_175_Para_10'/>
10. <emph>The Luther Centenary, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1883.</emph>&mdash;The celebration of Luther's
birth was carried out with great enthusiasm throughout all Germany,
more than a thousand tracts on Luther and the Reformation were
published, statues were erected, special services were held in all
Lutheran churches, high schools, and universities, and brilliant
demonstrations were made at Jena, Worms, Wittenberg, and Eisleben.
There were founded at Kiel a Luther-house, at Worms and at the
Wartburg Luther libraries, in Leipzig and Berlin Luther churches.
At Eisleben a bronze statue of the reformer was solemnly unveiled
representing his tearing the papal bull with his right hand and
pressing the Bible to his heart with his left. Another noble
monument was raised by the munificence of the emperor by the
issuing during this year of the first volume of pastor Knaake's critical
edition of Luther's works. A <q>German Luther Institute</q> aims at
assisting children of the poorer clergy and teachers, and a <q>Reformation
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
History Society</q> has undertaken the task of issuing popular
tracts on the persons, events and principles of that and the succeeding
period based upon original documents. Protestants of all lands, with
the exception of the English high-church party, contributed liberally;
the Americans had a copy of the great Luther statue of the Worms
monument (<ref target='Section_178_Para_1'>§ 178, 1</ref>) made and erected in Washington. Even in Italy
the liberal press eulogised Luther, while the ultramontanes loaded his
memory with unmeasured calumny and reproach. The threatened
counter-demonstrations of German ultramontanes fell quite flat and
harmless. The <emph>Zwingli Centenary</emph> of January 1st, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1884, was celebrated
with enthusiasm throughout the Reformed church, especially
in Switzerland. On the other hand, the celebration of the five-hundredth
anniversary of Wiclif's death on December 31st, 1884,
created comparatively little interest.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. Protestantism in General.<note place='foot'>Kahnis, <q>Internal History of German Protestantism since the
Middle of Last Century.</q> Edin., 1856.</note></head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 176. Rationalism and Pietism</head>

<p>
At the beginning of the century rationalism was generally
prevalent, but philosophy and literature soon weakened its
foundations, and the war of independence moved the hearts
of the people toward the faith of their fathers. Pietism
entered the lists against rationalism, and the Halle controversy
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830 marked the crisis of the struggle. The
rationalists were compelled to make appeal to the people by
popular agitators. During <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840 they managed to found
several <q>free churches,</q> which, however, had for the most
part but a short and unprosperous existence. They were
more successful in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860 with the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign> as
the instrument of their propaganda (<ref target='Section_180'>§ 180</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_176_Para_1'/>
1. The old <emph>Rationalism</emph> was attacked by the disciples of Hegel and
Schelling, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1834 Röhr of Weimar found Hase of Jena as
keen an opponent as any pietist or orthodox controversialist. That
recognised leader of the old rationalists had coolly attempted to substitute
a new and rational form of doctrine, worship, and constitution
for the antiquated formularies of the Reformation, and drew down
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
upon himself the rebuke even of those who sympathized with him
in his doctrinal views.&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1817 Claus Harms of Kiel, on the
occasion of the Reformation centenary, opened an attack upon those
who had fallen away from the faith of their fathers, by the publication
of ninety-five new theses, recalling attention to Luther's almost forgotten
doctrines. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1827 Aug. Hahn in an academical discussion
at Leipzig maintained that the rationalists should be expelled from
the church, and Hengstenberg started his <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Evangelische Kirchenzeitung</foreign>.
The jurist Von Gerlach in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830 charged Gesenius and
Wegscheider of Halle with open contempt of Christian truth, and
called for State interference. In all parts of Germany, amid the
opposition of scientific theologians and the scorn of philosophers,
pietism made way against rationalism, so that even men of culture
regarded it as a reproach to be reckoned among the rationalists.
Unbelief, however, was widespread among the masses. When
Sintenis, preacher in Magdeburg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840, declared the worship
of Christ superstitious, and was reprimanded by the consistory,
his neighbours, the pastors Uhlich and König, founded the society of
the <q>Friends of Light,</q> whose assembly at Köthen then was attended by
thousands of clergymen and laymen. In one of these assemblies in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1844, Wislicenus of Halle, by starting the question, Whether the
Scriptures or the reason is to be regarded as the standard of faith?
shattered the illusion that rationalism still occupied the platform of
the church and Scripture. The left wing of the school of Schleiermacher
took offence at the severe measures demanded by Hengstenberg
and his party, and in 1846 issued in Berlin a manifesto with eighty-eight
signatures against the paper pope of antiquated Reformation
confessions and the inquisitorial proceedings of the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kirchenzeitung</foreign>
party, as inimical to all liberty of faith and conscience, wishing only
to maintain firm hold of the truth that Jesus Christ is yesterday,
to-day, and for ever the one and only ground of salvation. The
Friends of Light, combining with the German Catholics and the
Young Hegelians, founded Free churches at Halle, Königsberg, and
many other places. Their services and sermons void of religion, in
which the Bible, the living Christ, and latterly even the personal God,
had no place, but only the naked worship of humanity, had temporary
vitality imparted them by the revolutionary movements of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848.
This gave the State an excuse, long wished for, to interfere, and soon
scarcely a trace of their churches was to be found.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_176_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Pietism</emph> had not been wholly driven out of the evangelical church
during the period of ecclesiastical impoverishment, but, purified from
many eccentric excesses, and seeking refuge and support for the most
part by attaching itself to the community of the Moravian Brethren,
it had, even in Württemberg, established itself independently and in
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
an essentially theosophical-chiliastic spirit. There too a kind of
spiritualism was introduced by the physician and poet Justin Kerner
of Weinsberg, and the philosopher Eschenmayer of Tübingen, with
spirit revelations from above and below. Amid the religious movements
of the beginning of the century Pietism gained a decided
advantage. It took the form of a protest against the rationalism
prevailing among the clergy. The earnest and devout sought spiritual
nourishment at conventicles and so-called <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Stunden</foreign> addressed by
laymen, mostly of the working class, well acquainted with Scripture
and works in practical divinity. Persecuted by the irreligious mob,
the rationalist clergy, and sometimes by the authorities, they by-and-by
secured representatives among the younger clergy and in
the university chairs, and carried on vigorous missions at home
and abroad. This pietism was distinctly evangelical and Protestant.
It did not oppose but endeavoured simply to restore the orthodoxy
of the church confession. Yet it had many of the characteristics
of the earlier pietism: over-estimation of the invisible to the disparagement
of the visible church, of sanctification over justification,
a tendency to chiliasm, etc.&mdash;Of no less importance in awakening the
religious life throughout Germany, and especially in Switzerland, was
the missionary activity of Madame de Krüdener of Riga. This lady,
after many years of a gay life, forsook the world, and began in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1814 her travels through Europe, preaching repentance, proclaiming
the gospel message in the prisons, the foolishness of the cross to the
wise of this world, and to kings and princes the majesty of Christ as
King of kings. Wherever she went she made careless sinners tremble,
and drew around her crowds of the anxious and spiritually burdened
of every sort and station. Honoured by some as a saint, prophetess,
and wonder-worker, ridiculed by others as a fool, persecuted as a
dangerous fanatic or deceiver, driven from one country to another, she
died in the Crimea in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1824.<note place='foot'>Hagenbach, <q>History of Church in Eighteenth and Nineteenth
Centuries,</q> vol. ii., pp. 413-416.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_176_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Königsberg Religious Movement, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835-1842.</emph>&mdash;The pious
theosophist, J. H. Schönherr of Königsberg, starting from the two
primitive substances, fire and water, developed a system of theosophy
in which he solved the riddles of the theogony and cosmogony, of sin
and redemption, and harmonized revelation with the results of natural
science. At first influenced by these views, but from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1819 expressly
dissenting from them, J. W. Ebel, pastor in the same city,
gathered round him a group of earnest Christian men and women,
Counts Kanitz and Finkenstein and their wives, Von Tippelskirch,
afterwards preacher to the embassy at Rome, the theological professor
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
H. Olshausen, the pastor Dr. Diestel, and the medical doctor Sachs.
After some years Olshausen and Tippelskirch withdrew, and dissensions
arose which gave opportunity to the ecclesiastical authorities
to order an investigation. Ebel was charged with founding a sect in
which impure practices were encouraged. He was suspended in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1835, and at the instigation of the consistory a criminal process was
entered upon against him. Dr. Sachs, who had been expelled from
the society, was the chief and almost only witness, but vague rumours
were rife about mystic rites and midnight orgies. Ebel and Diestel
were deposed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1839, and pronounced incapable of holding any
public office; and as a sect founder Ebel was sentenced to imprisonment
in the common jail. On appeal to the court of Berlin, the
deposition was confirmed, but all the rest of the sentence was quashed,
and the parties were pronounced capable of holding any public offices
except those of a spiritual kind. Two reasons were alleged for deposition:
(1) That Ebel, though not from the pulpit or in the public
instruction of the young, yet in private religious teaching, had inculcated
his theosophical views. (2) That both of them as married men
had given expression to opinions injurious to the purity of married
life. In general they were charged with spreading a doctrine which
was in conflict with the principles of Christianity, and making such use
of sexual relations as was fitted to awaken evil thoughts in the minds
of hearers. Ebel was pronounced guiltless of sectarianism.&mdash;Kanitz
wrote a book in defence, which represents Ebel and Diestel as martyrs
to their pure Christian piety in an age hostile to every pietistic
movement; whereas Von Wegnern, followed by Hepworth Dixon, in a
romancing and frivolous style, lightly give currency to evil surmisings
without offering any solid basis of proof. The whole affair still
waits for a patient and unprejudiced investigation.<note place='foot'>Mombert, <q>Faith Victorious, being an Account of the Life, Labour,
and Times of Dr. J. W. Ebel, 1714-1861, compiled from authentic
sources.</q> London, 1882. Dixon, <q>Spiritual Wives.</q> London, 1868.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_176_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Bender Controversy.</emph>&mdash;At the Luther centenary festival of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1883, Prof. Bender of Bonn declared that in the confessional writings
of the Reformation evangelical truth had been obscured by Romish
scholasticism, introduced by subtle jurists and sophistical theologians.
This called forth vigorous opposition, in which two of his colleagues,
38 theological students, 59 members of the Rhenish synod, took part.
General-Superintendent Baur, also, in a new year's address, inveighed
against Bender's statements. On the other hand, 170 students of Bonn,
32 of these theological students, gave a grand ovation to the <q>brave
vindicator of academic freedom.</q> The Rhenish and Westphalian
synods bewailed the offence given by Bender's address, and protested
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
against its hard and unfounded attacks upon the confessional writings.
At the Westphalian synod, Prof. Mangold said that the faculty was
as much offended at the address as the church had been, but that its
author, when he found how his words had created such feeling, sought
in every way to repress the agitation, and had intended only to pass
a scientific judgment on ecclesiastical and theological developments.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_177'/>
<head>§ 177. Evangelical Union and Lutheran Separation.</head>

<p>
From <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1817 Prussia favoured and furthered the
scheme for union between the two evangelical churches,
and over this question a split arose in the camp of pietism.
On the one hand were the confessionalists, determined to
maintain what was distinctive in their symbols, and on the
other, those who would sacrifice almost anything for union.
For the most part both churches cordially seconded the
efforts of the royal head of the church; only in Silesia did
a Lutheran minority refuse to give way, which still maintains
a separate existence.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_177_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Evangelical Union.</emph>&mdash;Circumstances favoured this movement.
Both in the Lutheran and in the Reformed church comparatively
little stress was laid upon distinctive confessional doctrines, and
pietism and rationalism, for different reasons, had taught the relative
unimportance of dogma. And so a general accord was given to the
king's proposal, at the Reformation centenary of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1817, to fortify
the Protestant church by means of a <emph>Union</emph> of Lutherans and Calvinists.
The new Book of Common Order of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1822, in the preparation
of which the pious king, Frederick William III., had himself
taken part, was indeed condemned by many as too high-church, even
Catholicizing in its tendency. A revised edition in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1829, giving
a wider choice of formularies, was legally authorized, and the union
became an accomplished fact. There now existed in Prussia an
evangelical national church with a common government and liturgy,
embracing within it three different sections: a Lutheran, and a
Reformed, which held to their distinctive doctrines, though not
regarding these as a cause of separation, and a real union party, which
completely abandoned the points of difference. But more and more
the union became identified with doctrinal indifferentism and slighting
of all church symbols, and those in whom the church feeling still
prevailed were driven into opposition to the union (<ref target='Section_193'>§ 193</ref>). The
example of Prussia in sacking the union of the two churches was
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
followed by Nassau, Baden, Rhenish Bavaria, Anhalt, and to some
extent in Hesse (§§ <ref target='Section_194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Section_196'>196</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_177_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Lutheran Separation.</emph>&mdash;Though the union denied that there
was any passing over from one church to another, it practically
declared the distinctive doctrines to be unessential, and so assumed
the standpoint of the Reformed church. Steffens (<ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>§ 174, 3</ref>), the
friend of Scheibel of Breslau, who had been deprived of his professorship
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1832 for his determined opposition to the union,
and died in exile in 1843 (<ref target='Section_195_Para_2'>§ 195, 2</ref>), headed a reaction in favour
of old Lutheranism. Several suspended clergymen in Silesia held
a synod at Breslau in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835, to organize a Lutheran party, but
the civil authorities bore so heavily upon them that most of them
emigrated to America and Australia. Guericke of Halle, secretly
ordained pastor, ministered in his own house to a small company
of Lutheran separatists, was deprived of his professorship in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1835, and only restored in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840, after he had apologised for
his conduct. From <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1838, the laws were modified by Frederick
William IV., imprisoned clergymen were liberated in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840, and a
Lutheran church of Prussia independent of the national church was
constituted by a general synod at Breslau in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1841, which received
recognition by royal favour in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1845. The affairs are administered
by a supreme council resident in Breslau, presided over by the distinguished
jurist Huschke. Other separations were prevented by timely
concessions on the part of the national church. The separatists
claim 50,000 members, with fifty pastors and seven superintendents.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_177_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Separation within the Separation.</emph>&mdash;Differences arose among
the separate Lutherans, especially over the question of the visible
church. The majority, headed by Huschke, defined the visible
church as an organism of various offices and orders embracing even
unbelievers, which is to be sifted by the divine judgment. To it
belongs the office of church government, which is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jus divinum</foreign>, and
only in respect of outward form a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jus humanum</foreign>. The opposition
understood visibility of the preaching of the word and dispensation of
sacraments, and held that unbelievers belonged as little to the visible
as to the invisible church. The distribution of orders and offices is a
merely human arrangement without divine appointment, individual
members are quite independent of one another, the church recognises
no other government than that of the unfettered preaching of the
word, and each pastor rules in his own congregation. Diedrich of
Jabel and seven other pastors complained of the papistical assumptions
of the supreme council, and at a general synod in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860
refused to recognise the authority of that council, or of a majority of
synods, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1861, along with their congregations, they formally
seceded and constituted the so called Immanuel Synod.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_178'/>
<head>§ 178. Evangelical Confederation.</head>

<p>
The union had only added a third denomination to the
two previously existing, and was the means of even further
dissension and separation. Thus the interests of Protestantism
were endangered in presence of the unbelief within
her own borders and the machinations of the ultramontane
Catholics without. An attempt was therefore made in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1840 to combine the scattered Protestant forces, by means
of confederation, for common work and conflict with common
foes.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_178_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Gustavus Adolphus Society.</emph>&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1832, on the two hundredth
anniversary of the birth of the saviour of German Protestantism, on the
motion of Superintendent Grossman of Leipzig, a society was formed
for the help of needy Protestant churches, especially in Catholic
districts. At first almost confined to Saxony, it soon spread over
Germany, till only Bavaria down to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1849, and Austria down to
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860, were excluded by civil enactment from its operations. The
masses were attracted by the simplicity of its basis, which was simply
opposition to Catholicism, and the demagogical Friends of Light soon
found supremacy in its councils. Because of opposition to the expulsion
of Rupp, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1846, as an apostate from the principle of protestantism,
great numbers with church leanings seceded, and attempted to
form a rival union in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1847. After recovering from the convulsions
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848, under the wise guidance of Zimmermann of Darmstadt, the
society regained a solid position. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1883 it had 1,779 branches,
besides 392 women's and 11 students' unions, and a revenue for the
year of about £43,000.&mdash;The same feeling led to the erection of the
<emph>Luther Monument at Worms</emph>. This work of genius, designed by Rietschel,
and completed after his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1857 by his pupils, and
inaugurated on 25th June, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868, represents all the chief episodes
in the Reformation history. It was erected at a cost of more than
£20,000, raised by voluntary contributions, and the scheme proved so
popular that there was a surplus of £2,000, which was devoted to the
founding of bursaries for theological students.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_178_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Eisenach Conference.</emph>&mdash;The other German states borrowed the
idea of confederation from Prussia and Württemberg. It took practical
shape in the meetings of deputies at Eisenach, begun in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1852, and
was held for a time yearly, and afterwards every second year, to consult
together on matters of worship, discipline and constitution. Beyond
ventilating such questions the conference yielded no result.
</p>

<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_178_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Evangelical Alliance.</emph>&mdash;An attempt was made in England, on
the motion of Dr. Chalmers (<ref target='Section_202_Para_7'>§ 202, 7</ref>), at a yet more comprehensive
confederation of all Protestant churches of all lands against the
encroachments of popery and puseyism (<ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>§ 202, 2</ref>). After several
preliminary meetings the first session of the <emph>Evangelical Alliance</emph> was
held in London in August, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1846. Its object was the fraternizing
of all evangelical Christians on the basis of agreement upon the
fundamental truths of salvation, the vindication and spread of this
common faith, and contention for liberty of conscience and religious
toleration. Nine articles were laid down as terms of membership:
Belief in the inspiration of Scripture, in the Trinity, in the divinity
of Christ, in original sin, in justification by faith alone, in the
obligatoriness of the two sacraments, in the resurrection of the body,
in the last judgment, and in the eternal blessedness of the righteous
and the eternal condemnation of the ungodly. It could thus include
Baptists, but not Quakers. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1855 it held its ninth meeting
at the great Paris Industrial Exhibition as a sort of church exhibition,
the representatives of different churches reporting on the
condition of their several denominations. The tenth meeting, of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1857, was held in Berlin. The council of the Alliance, presided over
by Sir Culling Eardley, presented an address to King Frederick
William IV., in which it was said that they aimed a blow not only
against the sadduceanism, but also against the pharisaism of the
German evangelical church. The confessional Lutherans, who had
opposed the Alliance, regarded this latter reference as directed against
them. The king, however, received the deputation most graciously,
while declaring that he entertained the brightest hopes for the future
of the church, and urged cordial brotherly love among Christians.
Though many distinguished confessionalists were members of the
Alliance none of them put in an appearance. The members of the
<q>Protestantenverein</q> (<ref target='Section_180'>§ 180</ref>) would not take part because the articles
were too orthodox. On the other hand, numerous representatives of
pietism, unionism, Melanchthonianism, as well as Baptists, Methodists,
and Moravians, crowded in from all parts, and were supported by the
leading liberals in church and state. While there was endless talk
about the oneness and differences of the children of God, about the
universal priesthood, about the superiority of the present meeting over
the œcumenical councils of the ancient church, about the want of
spiritual life in the churches, even where the theology of the confessions
was professed, etc., with denunciations of half-Catholic Lutheranism
and its sacramentarianism and officialism, and many a true and
admirable statement of what the church's needs are, Merle d'Aubigné
introduced discord by the hearty welcome which he accorded his
friend Bunsen, which was intensified by the passionate manner in
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
which Krummacher reported upon it. The gracious royal reception
of the members of the Alliance, at which Krummacher gave expression
to his excited feelings in the words, <q>Your Majesty, we would all fall
not at your feet, but on your neck!</q> was described by his brother,
Dr. F. W. Krummacher, as a sensible prelude to the solemn scenes of
the last judgment. Sir Culling Eardley declared, <q>There is no more
the North Sea.</q> Lord Shaftesbury said in London that with the
Berlin Assembly a new era had begun in the world's history; and
others who had returned from it extolled it as a second Pentecost.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_178_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Evangelical Church Alliance.</emph>&mdash;After the revolution of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848,
the most distinguished theologians, clergymen and laymen well-affected
toward the church, sought to bring about a confederation of
the Lutheran, Reformed, United, and Moravian churches. When they
held their second assembly at Wittenberg, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1849, many of the
strict Lutherans had already withdrawn, especially those of Silesia.
The Lutheran congress, held shortly before at Leipzig under the
presidency of Harless, had pronounced the confederation unsatisfactory.
The political reaction in favour of the church had also taken away
the occasion for such a confederation. Yet the yearly deliberations of
this council on matters of practical church life did good service. An
attempt made at the Berlin meeting of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1853 to have the <foreign rend='italic'>Augustana</foreign>
adopted as the church confession awakened keen opposition. At the
Stuttgart meeting of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1857 there were violent debates on foreign
missions and evangelical Catholicity between the representatives of
confessional Lutheranism who had hitherto maintained connection
with the confederation and the unionist majority. The Lutherans
now withdrew. The attempt made at the Berlin October assembly
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871, amid the excitement produced by the glorious issue of the
Franco-Prussian War and the founding of the new German empire
with a Protestant prince, to draw into the confederation confessional
Lutherans and adherents of the <q>Protestantenverein,</q> in order to
form a grand German Protestant national church, miscarried, and
a meeting of the confederation in the old style met again at Halle in
the following year. But it was now found that its day was past.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_178_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Evangelical League.</emph>&mdash;At a meeting of the Prussian evangelical
middle party in autumn, 1886, certain members, <q>constrained by
grief at the surrender of arms by the Prussian government in the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign>,</q> gathered together for private conference, and resolved
in defence of the threatened interests of the evangelical church to
found an <q>Evangelical League</q> out of the various theological and
ecclesiastical parties. Prominent party leaders on both sides being
admitted, a number of moderate representatives of all schools were
invited to a consultative gathering at Erfurt. On January 15th,
1887, a call to join the membership of the league was issued. It was
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
signed by distinguished men of the middle party, such as Beyschlag,
Riehm of Halle, etc., moderate representatives of confessionalism and
the positive union, such as Kawerau of Kiel, Fricke of Leipzig, Witte,
Warneck, etc., and liberal theologians like Lipsius and Nippold of
Jena, etc.; and it soon received the addition of about 250 names. It
recognised Jesus Christ, as the only begotten Son of God, as the only
means of salvation, and professed the fundamental doctrines of the
Reformation. It represented the task of the League as twofold: on
the one hand the defending at all points the interests of the evangelical
church against the advancing pretensions of Rome, and, on the other
hand, the strengthening of the communal consciousness of the Christian
evangelical church against the cramping influence of party, as
well as in opposition to indifferentism and materialism. For the
accomplishment of this task the league organized itself under the control
of a central board with subordinate branches over all Germany,
each having a committee for representing its interests in the press, and
with annual general assemblies of all the members for common consultation
and promulgating of decrees.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 179. Lutheranism, Melanchthonianism, and
Calvinism.</head>

<p>
Widespread as the favourable reception of the Prussian
union had been, there were still a number of Lutheran states
in which the Reformed church had scarcely any adherents,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Bavaria, Saxony, Hanover, Mecklenburg, and Schleswig-Holstein;
and the same might be said of the Baltic Provinces
and of the three Scandinavian kingdoms. Also in
Austria, France, and Russia the two denominations kept
apart; and in Poland, the union of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1828 was dissolved
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1849 (<ref target='Section_206_Para_3'>§ 206, 3</ref>). The Lutheran confessional reaction
in Prussia afforded stimulus to those who had thus stood
apart. In all lands, amid the conflict with rationalism, the
confessional spirit both of Lutheran and Reformed became
more and more pronounced.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_179_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Lutheranism within the Union.</emph>&mdash;After the Prussian State church
had been undermined by the revolution of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848, an unsuccessful
attempt was made to have a pure Lutheran confessional church set
up in its place. At the October assembly in Berlin, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871, an
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
ineffectual effort was made by the United Lutherans to co-operate
with those who were unionists on principle. During the agitation
caused by the May Laws (<ref target='Section_197_Para_5'>§ 197, 5</ref>) and the Sydow proceedings (<ref target='Section_180_Para_4'>§ 180, 4</ref>),
the first general evangelical Lutheran conference was held in August,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1873, in Berlin. It assumed a moderate conciliatory tone toward
the union, pronounced the efforts of the <q>Protestantenverein</q> (<ref target='Section_180'>§ 180</ref>)
an apostasy from the fundamental doctrines of the gospel, bewailed
the issuing of the May Laws, protested against their principles, but
acknowledged the duty of obedience, and concluded an address to the
emperor with a petition on behalf of a democratic church constitution
and civil marriage.&mdash;The literary organs of the United Lutherans
are the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Evang. Kirchenzeitung</foreign>,</q> edited by Hengstenberg, and now
by Zöckler, and the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Allgem. konserv. Monatsschrift für die christl.
Deutschl.</foreign>,</q> by Von Nathusius.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_179_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Lutheranism outside of the Union.</emph>&mdash;A general Lutheran conference
was held under the presidency of Harless, in July, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868, at which
the sentiments of Kliefoth, denouncing a union under a common
church government without agreement about doctrine and sacraments,
met with almost universal acceptance. At the Leipzig gathering of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870, Luthardt urged the duty of firmly maintaining doctrinal
unity in the Lutheran church. The assembly of the following year
agreed to recognise the emperor as head of the church only in so far
as he did not interfere with the dispensation of word and sacrament,
admitted the legality of a merely civil marriage but maintained
that despisers of the ecclesiastical ordinance should be subjected to
discipline, that communion fellowship is to be allowed neither to
Reformed nor unionists if fixed residents, but to unionists faithful
to the confession if temporary residents, even without expressly joining
their party; and also with reference to the October assembly of the
previous year the union of the two Protestant churches of Germany
under a mixed system of church government was condemned. The
third general conference of Nüremburg, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1879, dealt with the
questions: Whether the church should be under State control or free?
Whether the schools should be denominational or not? and in both
cases decided in favour of the latter alternative.&mdash;Its literary organ
is Luthardt's <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Allg. Luth. Kirchenzeitung</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_179_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Melancthonianism and Calvinism.</emph>&mdash;The Reformed church of Germany
has maintained a position midway between Lutheranism and
Calvinism very similar to the later Melanchthonianism. Ebrard indeed
sought to prove that strict predestinarianism was only an excrescence
of the Reformed system, whereas Schweitzer, purely in the interests
of science (§ 182, <ref target='Section_182_Para_9'>9</ref>, <ref target='Section_182_Para_16'>16</ref>), has shown that it is its all-conditioning nerve
and centre, to which it owes its wonderful vitality, force, and consistency.
Heppe of Marburg went still further than Ebrard in his
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
attempt to combine Lutheranism and Calvinism in a <emph>Melancthonian
church</emph> (<ref target='Section_182_Para_16'>§ 182, 16</ref>), by seeking to prove that the original evangelical
church of Germany was Melanchthonian, that after Luther's death
the fanatics, more Lutheran than Luther, founded the so-called
Lutheran church and completed it by issuing the Formula of Concord;
that the Calvinizing of the Palatinate, Hesse, Brandenburg,
Anhalt was only a reaction against hyper- or pseudo-Lutheranism,
and that the restoration of the original Melanchthonianism, and the
modern union movement were only the completion of that restoration.
Schenkel's earlier contributions to Reformation history moved
in a similar direction. Ebrard also, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1851, founded a <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Ref.
Kirchenzeitung</foreign>.</q>&mdash;But even the genuine strict <emph>Calvinism</emph> had zealous
adherents during this century, not only in Scotland (<ref target='Section_202_Para_7'>§ 202, 7</ref>) and
the Netherlands (<ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>§ 200, 2</ref>), but also in Germany, especially in the
Wupperthal. G. D. Krummacher, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1816 pastor in Elberfeld,
and his nephew F. W. Krummacher of Barmen, were long its chief
representatives. When Prussia sought in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835 to force the
union in the Wupperthal, and threatened the opposing Reformed
pastors with deposition, the revolt here proved almost as serious as
that of the Lutherans in Silesia. The pastors, with the majority of
their people agreed at last to the union only in so far as it was in
accordance with the Reformed mode of worship. But a portion,
embracing their most important members, stood apart and refused
all conciliation. The royal Toleration Act of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1847 allowed them
to form an independent congregation at Elberfeld with Dr. Kohlbrügge
as their minister. This divine, formerly Lutheran pastor at
Amsterdam, was driven out owing to a contest with a rationalising
colleague, and afterwards, through study of Calvin's writings, became
an ardent Calvinist. This body, under the name of the Dutch
Reformed church, constituted the one anti-unionist, strictly Calvinistic
denomination in Prussia.&mdash;The De Cock movement (<ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>§ 200, 2</ref>), out
of which in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830 the separate <q>Chr. Ref. Church of Holland</q>
sprang, spread over the German frontiers and led to the founding
there of the <q>Old Ref. Church of East Frisia and Bentheim,</q> which
has now nine congregations and seven pastors.&mdash;At the meeting of the
Evangelical Alliance in New York in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1873, the Presbyterians
present resolved to convoke an œcumenical Reformed council. A
conference in London in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1875 brought to maturity the idea of
a Pan-Presbyterian assembly. The council is to meet every third
year; the members recognise the supreme authority of the Old and
New Testament in matters of faith and practice, and accept the
consensus of all the Reformed confessions. The first <q><emph>General Presbyterian
Council</emph></q> met in Edinburgh from 3rd to 10th July, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1877,
about 300 delegates being present. The proceedings consisted in
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
unmeasured glorification of presbyterianism <q>drawn from the whole
Scripture, from the seventy elders of the Pentateuch to the twenty-four
elders of the Apocalypse.</q> The second council met at Philadelphia
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1880, and boasted that it represented forty millions of Presbyterians.
It appointed a committee to draw up a consensus of the
confessions of all Reformed churches. The third council of 305 members
met at Belfast in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1884, and after a long debate declined, by
a great majority, to adopt a strictly formulated consensus of doctrine
as uncalled for and undesirable, and by the reception of the Cumberland
Presbyterians they even surrendered the Westminster Confession
(<ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>§ 155, 1</ref>) as the only symbol qualifying for membership of
the council. The fourth council met in London in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1887.&mdash;An
œcumenical Methodist congress was held in London in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1881,
attended by 400 delegates.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_180'/>
<head>§ 180. The <q>Protestantenverein.</q></head>

<p>
Rationalists of all descriptions, adherents of Baur's school,
as well as disciples of Hegel and Schleiermacher of the left
wing, kept far off from every evangelical union. But the
common negation of the tendencies characterizing the evangelical
confederations and the common endeavour after a
free, democratic, non-confessional organization of the German
Protestant church, awakened in them a sense of the
need of combination and co-operation. While in North Germany
this feeling was powerfully expressed from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1854,
in the able literary organ the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protest. Kirchenzeitung</foreign>,</q>
in South Germany, with Heidelberg as a centre and Dean
Zittel as chief agitator, local <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenvereine</foreign></q> were
formed, which combined in a united organization in the
Assembly of Frankfort, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1863. After long debates the
northern and southern societies were joined in one. In
June, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1865, the first general Protestant assembly was
held at Eisenach, and the nature, motive, and end of the
associations were defined. To these assemblies convened
from year to year members of the society crowded from
all parts of Germany in order to encourage one another to
persevere in spreading their views by word and pen, and to
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
take steps towards the founding of branch associations for
disseminating among the people a Christianity which renounces
the miraculous and sets aside the doctrines of the
church.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_180_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Protestant Assembly.</emph>&mdash;The first general German Protestant
Assembly, composed of 400 clerical and lay notabilities, met at Eisenach
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1865, under the presidency of the jurist Bluntschli of
Heidelberg and the chief court preacher Schwarz of Gotha. A peculiar
lustre was given to the meeting by the presence of Rothe of
Heidelberg. Of special importance was Schwarz's address on <q>The
Limits of Doctrinal Freedom in Protestantism,</q> which he sought not
in the confession, not in the authority of the letter of Scripture, not
even in certain so called fundamental articles, but in the one religious
moral truth of Christianity, the gospel of love and the divine fatherhood
as Christ taught it, expounded it in his life and sealed it by his
death. In Berlin, Osnabrück, and Leipzig, the churches were refused
for services according to the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign>. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868 fifteen
heads of families in Heidelberg petitioned the ecclesiastical council to
grant them the use of one of the city churches where a believing
clergyman might conduct service in the old orthodox fashion. This
request was refused by fifty votes against four. Baumgarten denounced
this intolerance, and declared that unless repudiated by the union it
would be a most serious stain upon its reputation. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1877 he
publicly withdrew from the society.
</p>

<p>
2. <emph>The <q>Protestantenverein</q> Propaganda.</emph>&mdash;The views of the union
were spread by popular lectures and articles in newspapers and magazines.
The <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestanten-Bibel</foreign>,</q> edited by Schmidt and Holtzendorff
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1872, of which an English translation has been published, giving
the results of New Testament criticism, <q>laid the axe at the root of the
dogmatics and confessionalism,</q> and proved that <q>we are still Christians
though our conception of Christianity diverges in many points
from that of the second century, and we proclaim a Christianity
without miracles and in accordance with the modern theory of the
universe.</q> The success of such efforts to spread the broad theology
has been greatly over-estimated. Enthusiastic partisans of the union
claimed to have the whole evangelical world at their back, while
Holtzendorff boasted that they had all thoughtful Germans with
them.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_180_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Sufferings Endured.</emph>&mdash;In many instances members of the society
were disciplined, suspended and deposed. In October, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1880,
<emph>Beesenmeyer</emph> of Mannheim, on his appointment to Osnabrück, was
examined by the consistory. He confessed an economic but not an
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
essential Trinity, the sinlessness and perfect godliness but not the
divinity of Christ, the atoning power of Christ's death but not the
doctrine of vicarious satisfaction. He was pronounced unorthodox,
and so unfit to hold office. <emph>Schroeder</emph>, a pastor in the consistory of
Wiesbaden in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871, on his refusing to use the Apostles' Creed
at baptism and confirmation, was deposed, but on appealing to the
minister of worship, Dr. Falk, he was restored in the beginning of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1874. The Stettin consistory declined to ordain Dr. <emph>Hanne</emph> on
account of his work <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Der ideale u. d. geschichtl. Christus</foreign>,</q> and an
appeal to the superior court and another to the king were unsuccessful.
Several members of the church protested against the call of Dr.
<emph>Ziegler</emph> to Liegnitz in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1873, on account of his trial discourse and
a previous lecture on the authority of the Bible, and the consistory
refused to sustain the call. The Supreme Church Council, however,
when appealed to, declared itself satisfied with Ziegler's promise to
take unconditionally the ordination vow, which requires acceptance
of the fundamental doctrines of the gospel and not the peculiar theological
system of the symbols.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_180_Para_4'/>
4. The conflicts in <emph>Berlin</emph> were specially sharp. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1872 the
aged pastor of the so called New Church, Dr. <emph>Sydow</emph>, delivered a lecture
on the miraculous birth of Jesus, in which he declared that
he was the legitimate son of Joseph and Mary. His colleague, Dr.
<emph>Lisco</emph>, son of the well-known commentator, spoke of legendary elements
in the Apostles' Creed, and denied its authority. Lisco was reprimanded
and cautioned by the consistory. Sydow was deposed. He
appealed, together with twenty-six clergymen of the province of
Brandenburg, and twelve Berlin pastors, to the Supreme Church Council.
The Jena theologians also presented a largely signed petition
to Dr. Falk against the procedure of the consistory, while the Weimar
and Württemberg clergy sent a petition in favour of maintaining
strict discipline. The superior court reversed the sentence, on the
ground that the lecture was not given in the exercise of his office, and
severely reprimanded Sydow for giving serious offence by its public
delivery. At a Berlin provincial synod in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1877, an attack was
made by pastor <emph>Rhode</emph> on creed subscription. <emph>Hossbach</emph>, preaching in
a vacant church, declared that he repudiated the confessional doctrine
of the divinity of Christ, regarded the life of Jesus in the gospels as a
congeries of myths, etc. Some loudly protested and others as eagerly
pressed for his settlement. The consistory accepted Rhode's retractation
and annulled Hossbach's call. The Supreme Church Council
supported the consistory, and issued a strict order to its president to
suffer no departure from the confession. The congregation next chose
Dr. <emph>Schramm</emph>, a pronounced adherent of the same party, who was also
rejected. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1879 <emph>Werner</emph>, biographer of Boniface, a more moderate
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
disciple of the same school, holding a sort of Arian position, received
the appointment. When, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1880, the Supreme Church
Council demanded of Werner a clear statement of his belief regarding
Scripture, the divinity and resurrection of Christ, and the Apostles
Creed, and on receiving his reply summoned him to a conference at
Berlin, he resigned his office.
</p>

<p>
5. The conflicts in Schleswig Holstein also caused considerable
excitement. Pastor <emph>Kühl</emph> of Oldensworth had published an article at
Easter, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1880, entitled, <q>The Lord is Risen indeed,</q> in which the
resurrection was made purely spiritual. He was charged with violating
his ordination vow, sectaries pointed to his paper as proof of
their theory that the state church was the apocalyptic Babylon, and
petitions from 115 ministers and 2,500 laymen were presented against
him to the consistory of Kiel. The consistory exhorted Kühl to be
more careful and his opponents to be more patient. In the same year,
however, he published a paper in which he denied that the order of
nature was set aside by miracles. He was now advised to give up
writing and confine himself to his pastoral work. A pamphlet by
Decker on <q>The Old Faith and the New,</q> was answered by <emph>Lühr</emph>,
and his mode of dealing with the ordination vow was of such a kind
as to lead pastor Paulsen to speak of it as a <q>chloroforming of his
conscience.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 181. Disputes about Forms of Worship.</head>

<p>
During the eighteenth century the services of the evangelical
church had become thoroughly corrupted and disordered
under the influence of the <q>Illumination,</q> and were
quite incapable of answering to the Christian needs and
ecclesiastical tastes of the nineteenth century. Whenever
there was a revival in favour of the faith of their fathers,
a movement was made in the direction of improved forms of
worship. The Rationalists and Friends of Light, however,
prevented progress except in a few states. Even the official
Eisenach Conference did no more than prepare the way and
indicate how action might afterwards be taken.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_181_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Hymnbook.</emph>&mdash;Traces of the vandalism of the Illumination
were to be seen in all the hymnbooks. The noble poet Ernst Moritz
Arndt was the first to enter the lists as a restorer; and various attempts
were made by Von Elsner, Von Raumer, Bunsen, Stier, Knapp,
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
Daniel, Harms, etc., to make collections of sacred songs answerable
to the revived Christian sentiment of the people. These came to be
largely used, not in the public services, but in family worship, and
prepared the way for official revisal of the books for church use. The
Eisenach Conference of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1853 resolved to issue 150 classical hymns
with the old melodies as an appendix to the old collection and a
pattern for further work. Only with difficulty was the resolution
passed to make <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1750 the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>terminus ad quem</foreign> in the choice of pieces.
Wackernagel insisted on a strict adherence to the original text and
retired from the committee when this was not agreed to. Only in
a few states has the Eisenach collection been introduced; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> in
Bavaria, where it has been incorporated in its new hymnbook.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_181_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Book of Chorales.</emph>&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814, Frederick William III. of
Prussia sought to secure greater prominence to the liturgy in the
church service. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1817, Natorp of Münster expressed himself
strongly as to the need of restoring the chorale to its former position,
and he was followed by the jurist Thibaut, whose work on <q>The
Purity of Tone</q> has been translated into English. The reform of
the chorale was carried out most vigorously in Württemberg, but it
was in Bavaria that the old chorale in its primitive simplicity was
most widely introduced.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_181_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Liturgy.</emph>&mdash;Under the reign of the Illuminists the liturgy had
suffered even more than the hymns. The Lutherans now went back
to the old Reformation models, and liturgical services, with musical
performances, became popular in Berlin. Conferences held at Dresden
did much for liturgical reform, and the able works and collections
of Schöberlein supplied abundant materials for the practical carrying
out of the movement.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_181_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Holy Scriptures.</emph>&mdash;The Calw Bible in its fifth edition adopted
somewhat advanced views on inspiration, the canon and authenticity,
while maintaining generally the standpoint of the most reverent and
pious students of scripture. Bunsen's commentary assumed a <q>mediating</q>
position, and the <q>Protestant Bible</q> on the New Testament,
translated into English, that of the advanced school. Besser's
expositions of the New Testament books, of which we have in
English those on John's gospel, had an unexampled popularity. The
Eisenach Conference undertook a revision of Luther's translation of
the Bible. The revised New Testament was published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870,
and accepted by some Bible societies. The much more difficult task
of Old Testament revision was entrusted to a committee of distinguished
university theologians, which concluded its labours in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1881. A <q>proof</q> Bible was issued in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1883, and the final corrected
rendering in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1886. A whole legion of pamphlets were now
issued from all quarters. Some bitterly opposing any change in the
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
Luther-text, others severely criticising the work, so that the whole
movement seems now at a standstill.<note place='foot'>Strack, <q>The Work of Bible Revision in Germany,</q> in <emph>Expositor</emph>,
third series, vol. ii., pp. 178-187.</note>&mdash;In England, in May, 1885, the
work of revision of the English version of the Bible, undertaken by
order of convocation, was completed after fifteen years' labour, and
issued jointly by the two universities of Oxford and Cambridge. The
revised New Testament, prepared four years previously, had been telegraphed
in short sections to America by the representative of the
<emph>New York Herald</emph>, so that the complete work appeared there rather
earlier than in England. But in the case of the Old Testament
revision such freebooting industry was prevented by the strict and
careful reserve of all concerned in the work. The revised New Testament
had meanwhile never been introduced into the public services;
whether the completed Bible will ever succeed in overcoming this
prejudice remains to be seen.<note place='foot'>See papers by Driver, Cheyne, Davidson, Kirkpatrick, in <emph>Expositor</emph>
for 1886-1888, on various books in Revised Old Testament. Westcott,
<q>Some Lessons of Revised Version of New Testament,</q> in <emph>Expositor</emph>,
third series, vol. v., pp. 81, 241, 453. Jennings and Lowe, <q>Revised
Version of Old Testament: a Critical Estimate,</q> in <emph>Expositor</emph>, third
Series, vol. ii., pp. 57, etc.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 182. Protestant Theology in Germany.</head>

<p>
The real founder of modern Protestant theology, the Origen
of the nineteenth century, is Schleiermacher. His influence
was so powerful and manysided that it extended not merely
to his own school, but also in almost all directions, even to
the Catholic church, embracing destructive and constructive
tendencies such as appeared before in Origen and Erigena.
Alongside of the vulgar rationalism, which still had notable
representatives, De Wette founded the new school of
historico-critical rationalism, and Neander that of pietistic
supernaturalism, which soon overshadowed the two older
schools of rational and supra-rational supernaturalism. On
the basis of Schelling's and Hegel's philosophy Daub
founded the school of speculative theology with an evangelical
tendency; but after Hegel's death it split into a right
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
and left wing. As the former could not maintain its position,
its adherents by-and-by went over to other schools; and
the latter, setting aside speculation and dogmatics, applied
itself to the critical investigation of the early history of
Christianity, and founded the school of Baur at Tübingen.
Schleiermacher's school also split into a right and left wing.
Each of them took the union as its standard; but the right,
which claimed to be the <q>German</q> and the <q>Modern</q>
theology, wished a union under a consensus of the confessions,
and sought to effect an accommodation between the old faith
and the modern liberalism; whereas the left wished union
without a confession, and unconditioned toleration of <q>free
science.</q> This latter tendency, however, secured greater
prominence and importance from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1854, through combination
with the representatives of the historico-critical and
the younger generation of the Baurian school, from which
originated the <q>free Protestant</q> theology. On the other
hand, under the influence of pietism, there has arisen since
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830, especially in the universities of Erlangen, Leipzig,
Rostock, and Dorpat, a Lutheran confessional school, which
seeks to develop a Lutheran system of theology of the type
of Gerhard and Bengel. A similar tendency has also shown
itself in the Reformed church. The most recent theological
school is that founded by Ritschl, resting on a Lutheran
basis but regarded by the confessionalists as rather allied to
the <q>free Protestant</q> theology, on account of its free treatment
of certain fundamental doctrines of Lutheranism.&mdash;Theological
contributions from Scandinavia, England, and
Holland are largely indebted to German theology.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Schleiermacher, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1768-1834.</emph>&mdash;Thoroughly grounded in philosophy
and deeply imbued with the pious feeling of the Moravians
among whom he was trained, Schleiermacher began his career in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1807 as professor and university preacher at Halle, but, to escape
French domination, went in the same year to Berlin, where by speech
and writing he sought to arouse German patriotism. There he was
appointed preacher in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1809, and professor in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1810, and continued
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
to hold these offices till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1834. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1799 he published
five <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Reden über d. Religion</foreign>.</q> In these it was not biblical and still
less ecclesiastical Christianity which he sought with glowing eloquence
to address to the hearts of the German people, but Spinozist pantheism.
The fundamental idea of his life, that God, <q>the absolute unity,</q>
cannot be reached in thought nor grasped by will, but only embraced
in feeling as immediate consciousness, and hence that feeling is the
proper seat of religion, appears already in his early productions as
the centre of his system. In the following year, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1800, he set forth
his ethical theory in five <q>Monologues</q>: every man should in his own
way represent humanity in a special blending of its elements. The study
and translation of Plato, which occupied him now for several years,
exercised a powerful influence upon him. He approached more and more
towards positive Christianity. In a Christmas Address in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1803 on
the model of Plato's Symposium, he represents Christ as the divine
object of all faith. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1811 he published his <q>Short Outline of
Theological Study,</q> which has been translated into English, a masterly
sketch of theological encyclopædia. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1821 he produced his
great masterpiece, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Der Chr. Glaube</foreign>,</q> which makes feeling the seat of
all religion as immediate consciousness of absolute dependence, perfectly
expressed in Jesus Christ, whose life redeems the world. The task
of dogmatics is to give scientific expression to the Christian consciousness
as seen the life of the redeemed; it has not to prove, but only to
work out and exhibit in relation to the whole spiritual life what is
already present as a fact of experience. Thus dogmatics and philosophy
are quite distinct. He proves the evangelical Protestant character
of the doctrines thus developed by quotations from the consensus of
both confessions. Notwithstanding his protest, many of his contemporaries
still found remnants of Spinozist pantheism. On certain
points too, he failed to satisfy the claims of orthodoxy; <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> in his
Sabellian doctrine of the Trinity, his theory of election, his doctrine
of the canon, and his account of the beginning and close of our Lord's
life, the birth and the ascension.<note place='foot'><q>Schleiermacher's Life in Letters,</q> translated by Rowan. London,
1860. Baur, <q>Religious Life in Germany,</q> London, 1872, pp. 197 ff.
Dorner, <q>History of Protestant Theology,</q> vol. ii., pp. 374-395.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Older Rationalistic Theology.</emph>&mdash;The older, so-called vulgar
rationalism, was characterized by the self-sufficiency with which it
rejected all advances from philosophy and theology, science and
national literature. The new school of historico-critical rationalism
availed itself of every aid in the direction of scientific investigation.
The father of the vulgar rationalism of this age was <emph>Röhr</emph> of Weimar,
who exercised his ingenuity in proving how one holding such views
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
might still hold office in the church. To this school also belonged
<emph>Paulus</emph> of Heidelberg, described by Marheineke as one who believes he
thinks and thinks he believes but was incapable of either; <emph>Wegscheider</emph>
of Halle, who in his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Institutions theol. Christ. dogmaticæ</foreign></q> repudiates
miracles; <emph>Bretschneider</emph> of Gotha, who began as a supernaturalist and
afterwards went over to extreme rationalism; and <emph>Ammon</emph> of Dresden,
who afterwards passed over to rational supernaturalism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_3'/>
3. The founder of <emph>Historico-critical Rationalism</emph> was <emph>De Wette</emph>; a
contemporary of Schleiermacher in Berlin University, but deprived of
office in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1819 for sending a letter of condolence to the mother of
Sands, which was regarded as an apology for his crime. From <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1822 till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1849 he continued to work unweariedly
in Basel. His theological position had its starting point in the
philosophy of his friend Fries, which he faithfully adhered to down
to the end of his life. His friendship with Schleiermacher had also a
powerful influence upon him. He too placed religion essentially in
feeling, which, however, he associated much more closely with knowledge
and will. In the church doctrines he recognised an important
symbolical expression of religious truths, and so by the out and out
rationalist he was all along sneered at as a mystic. But his chief
strength lay in the sharp critical treatment which he gave to the
biblical canon and the history of the O.T. and N.T. His commentaries
on the whole of the N.T. are of permanent value, and contain his
latest thoughts, when he had approached most nearly to positive
Christianity. His literary career began in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1806 with a critical
examination of the books of Chronicles. He also wrote on the Psalms,
on Jewish history, on Jewish archæology, and made a new translation
of the Bible. His Introductions to the O.T. and N.T. have been translated
into English.&mdash;<emph>Winer</emph> of Leipzig is best known by his <q>Grammar
of New Testament Greek,</q> first published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1822, of which several
English and American translations have appeared, the latest and best
that of Dr. Moulton, made in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870, from the sixth German edition.
He also edited an admirable <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bibl. Reallexicon</foreign>,</q> and wrote a work
on symbolics which has been translated into English under the title
<q>A Comparative View of the Doctrines and Confessions of the Various
Communities of Christendom</q> (Edin., 1873).&mdash;<emph>Gesenius</emph> of Halle, who
died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1842, has won a high reputation by his grammatical and
lexicographical services and as author of a commentary on Isaiah&mdash;<emph>Hupfeld</emph>
of Marburg and Halle, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1866, best known
by his work in four vols. on the Psalms, in his critical attitude
toward the O.T., belonged to the same party.&mdash;<emph>Hitzig</emph> of Zürich and
Heidelberg, who died <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1875, far outstripped all the rest in genius
and subtlety of mind and critical acuteness. He wrote commentaries
on most of the prophets and critical investigations into the O.T.
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
history.&mdash;<emph>Ewald</emph> of Göttingen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1803-1875, whose hand was against
every man and every man's hand against him, held the position of
recognised dictator in the domain of Hebrew grammar, and uttered
oracles as an infallible expounder of the biblical books. In his
<emph>Journal for Biblical Science</emph>, he held an annual <foreign rend='italic'>auto da fe</foreign> of all the
biblico-theological literature of the preceding year; and, assuming
a place alongside of Isaiah and Jeremiah, he pronounced in every
preface a prophetic burden against the theological, ecclesiastical, or
political ill doers of his time. His exegetical writings on the poetical
and prophetical books of the O.T., his <q>History of Israel down to the
Post-Apostolic Age,</q> and a condensed reproduction of his <q>Bible
Doctrine of God,</q> under the title: <q>Revelation, its Nature and
Record</q> and <q>Old and New Testament Theology,</q> have all appeared
in English translations, and exhibit everywhere traces of brilliant
genius and suggestive originality.<note place='foot'>Cheyne, <q>Life and Works of Heinrich Ewald,</q> in <emph>Expositor</emph>, third
series, vol. iv., pp. 241 ff., 361 ff.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Supernaturalism</emph> of the older type (<ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>§ 171, 8</ref>) was now represented
by Storr, Reinhard, Planck, Knapp, and Stäudlin. In Württemberg
Storr's school maintained its pre-eminence down to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830.
Neander, Tholuck, and Hengstenberg may be described as the
founders and most powerful enunciators of the more recent <emph>Pietistic
Supernaturalism</emph>. Powerfully influenced by Schleiermacher, his colleague
in Berlin, <emph>Neander</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1789-1850, exercised an influence such
as no other theological teacher had exerted since Luther and Melanchthon.
Adopting Schleiermacher's standpoint, he regarded religion as
a matter of feeling: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pectus est quod theologum facit</foreign>. By his subjective
pectoral theology he became the father of modern scientific pietism,
but it incapacitated him from understanding the longing of the age
for the restoration of a firm objective basis for the faith. He was
adverse to the Hegelian philosophy no less than to confessionalism.
Neander was so completely a pectoralist, that even his criticism was
dominated by feeling, as seen in his vacillations on questions of N.T.
authenticity and historicity. His <q>Church History,</q> of which we have
admirable English translations, was an epoch-making work, and his
historical monographs were the result of careful original research.<note place='foot'>There are English translations of his <q>Life of Christ,</q> <q>First
Planting of Christianity,</q> <q>Antignostikus,</q> <q>History of Christian
Dogmas,</q> <q>Christian Life in the Early and Middle Ages,</q> all published
by Bohn.</note>&mdash;<emph>Tholuck</emph>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1799-1877, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1826 professor at Halle, at first devoted
to oriental studies, roused to practical interests by Baron von Kottwitz
of Berlin, gave himself with all his wide culture by preaching,
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
lecturing and conversing to lead his students to Christ. His scientific
theology was latitudinarian, but had the warmth and freshness of
immediate contact with the living Saviour. His most important
works are apologetical and exegetical. In his <q>Preludes to the
History of Rationalism</q> he gives curious glimpses into the scandalous
lives of students in the seventeenth century; and he afterwards confessed
that these studies had helped to draw him into close sympathy
with confessionalism. While always lax in his views of authenticity,
he came to adopt a very decided position in regard to revelation
and inspiration.&mdash;<emph>Hengstenberg</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1802-1869, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1826
professor in Berlin, had quite another sort of development. Rendered
determined by innumerable controversies, in none of which he abated
a single hair's breadth, he looked askance at science as a gift of the
Danaides, and set forth in opposition to rationalism and naturalism
a system of theology unmodified by all the theories of modern times.
Born in the Reformed church and in his understanding of Scripture
always more Calvinist than Lutheran, rationalising only upon
miracles that seemed to detract from the dignity of God, and in his
later years inclined to the Romish doctrine of justification, he may
nevertheless claim to be classed among the confessionalists within the
union. He deserves the credit of having given a great impulse to
O.T. studies and a powerful defence of O.T. books, though often
abandoning the position of an apologist for that of an advocate. His
<q>Christology of the Old Testament,</q> in four vols., <q>Genuineness of
the Pentateuch and Daniel,</q> three vols., <q>Egypt and the Books of
Moses,</q> commentaries on Psalms, Ecclesiastes, Ezekiel, the Gospel of
John, Revelation, and his <q>History of the Kingdom of God in the
Old Testament,</q> have all been translated into English.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_5'/>
5. The so called <emph>Rational Supernaturalism</emph> admits the supernatural
revelation in holy scripture, and puts reason alongside of it as an
equally legitimate source of religious knowledge, and maintains the
rationality of the contents of revelation. Its chief representative
was <emph>Baumgarten-Crusius</emph> of Jena. Of a similar tendency, but more
influenced by æsthetic culture and refined feeling, and latterly
inclining more and more to the standpoint of <q>free Protestantism,</q>
<emph>Carl Hase</emph>, after seven years' work in Tübingen, opened his Jena career
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830, which he closed by resigning his professorship in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1883, after sixty years' labour in the theological chair. In his <q>Life
of Jesus,</q> first published <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1829, he represents Christ as the ideal
man, sinless but not free from error, endowed with the fulness of
love and the power of pure humanity, as having truly risen and
become the author of a new life in the kingdom of God, of which the
very essence is most purely and profoundly expressed in the gospel
of the disciple who lay upon the Master's heart. The latest revision
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
of this work, issued in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1876 under the title <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Geschichte Jesu</foreign>,</q> treats
the fourth gospel as non-Johannnine in authorship and mythical in
its contents, and explains the resurrection by the theory of a swoon or
a vision. In his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hutterus Redivivus</foreign>,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1828, twelfth edition 1883,
he seeks to set forth the Lutheran dogmatic as Hutter might have
done had he lived in these days. This led to the publication of controversial
pamphlets in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1834-1837, which dealt the deathblow to
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rationalismus Vulgaris</foreign>. His <q>Church History,</q> distinguished
by its admirable little sketches of leading personalities, was published
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1834, and the seventh edition of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1854 has been translated
into English.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Speculative Theology.</emph>&mdash;Its founder was <emph>Daub</emph>, professor at Heidelberg
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1794 till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1836. Occupying and writing
from the philosophical standpoints of Kant, Fichte, and Schelling
successively, he published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1816 <q>Judas Iscariot,</q> an elaborate
discussion of the nature of evil, but passed over in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1833, with his
treatise on dogmatics, to the Hegelian position. He exerted great
influence as a professor, but his writings proved to most unintelligible.&mdash;<emph>Marheineke</emph>
of Berlin in the first edition of his <q>Dogmatics</q> occupied
the standpoint of Schelling, but in the second set forth Lutheran
orthodoxy in accordance with the formulæ of the Hegelian system.&mdash;After
Hegel's death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1831 his older pupils <emph>Rosenkranz</emph> and
<emph>Göschel</emph> sought to enlist his philosophy in the service of orthodoxy.
<emph>Richter</emph> was the first to give offence, by his <q>Doctrine of the Last
Things,</q> in which he denounced the doctrine of immortality in the
sense of personal existence after death. <emph>Strauss</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1808-1874, represented
the <q>Life of Jesus,</q> in his work of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835, as the product of
unintentional romancing, and in his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Glaubenslehre</foreign></q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840, sought
to prove that all Christian doctrines are put an end to by modern
science, and openly taught pantheism as the residuum of Christianity.
<emph>Bruno Bauer</emph>, after passing from the right to the left Hegelian wing,
described the gospels as the product of conscious fraud, and <emph>Ludwig
Feuerbach</emph>, in his <q>Essence of Christianity,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1841, set forth in all
its nakedness the new gospel of self-adoration. The breach between
the two parties in the school was now complete. Whatever Rosenkranz
and Schaller from the centre, and Göschel and Gabler from the
right, did to vindicate the honour of the system, they could not
possibly restore the for ever shattered illusion that it was fundamentally
Christian. Those of the right fell back into the camps of <q>the
German theology</q> and the Lutheran confessionalism; while in the
latest times the left has no prominent theological representative but
Biedermann of Zürich.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>The Tübingen School.</emph>&mdash;Strauss was only the advanced skirmisher
of a school which was proceeding under an able leader to subject the
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
history of early Christianity to a searching examination. <emph>Fred. Chr.
Baur</emph> of Tübingen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1792-1860, almost unequalled among his contemporaries
in acuteness, diligence, and learning, a pupil of Schleiermacher
and Hegel, devoted himself mainly to historical research
about the beginnings of Christianity. In this department he proceeded
to reject almost everything that had previously been believed.
He denied the genuineness of all the New Testament writings, with
the exception of Revelation and the Epistles to the Romans, Galatians,
and Corinthians; treating the rest as forgeries of the second century,
resulting from a bitter struggle between the Petrine and Pauline
parties. This scheme was set forth in a rudimentary form in the
treatise on <q>The So-called Pastoral Epistles of the Apostle Paul,</q>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835. His works, <q>Paul, the Apostle,</q> and the <q>History of the
First Three Centuries,</q> have been translated into English. He had
as collaborateurs in this work, Schwegler, Zeller, Hilgenfeld, Volkmar,
etc. <emph>Ritschl</emph>, who was at first an adherent of the school, made important
concessions to the right, and in the second edition of his
great work, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Die Entstehung d. alt-kath. Kirche</foreign>,</q> of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1857, announced
himself as an opponent. <emph>Hilgenfeld</emph> of Jena, too, marked
out new lines for himself in New Testament Introduction and in
the estimate of early church doctrine, modifying in various ways
the positions of Baur. The labours of this school and its opponents
have done signal service in the cause of science.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>Strauss</emph>, who had meanwhile occupied himself with the studies
of Von Hutten, Reimarus, and Lessing's <q>Nathan,</q> feeling that the
researches of the Tübingen school had antiquated his <q>Life of Jesus,</q>
and stimulated by Renan's <q>Life of Jesus,</q> written with French
elegance and vivacity, in which he described Christ as an amiable
hero of a Galilæan village story, undertook in 1864 a semi-jubilee
reproduction of his work, addressed to <q>the German people.</q> This
was followed by a severe controversial pamphlet, <q>The Half and
the Whole,</q> in which he lashed the halting attempts of Schenkel as
well as the uncompromising conservatism of Hengstenberg. He now
pointed out cases of intentional romancing in the gospel narratives;
the resurrection rests upon subjective visions of Christ's disciples.
His <q>Lectures on Voltaire</q> appeared in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1872 the
most radical of all his books, <q>The Old and the New Faith,</q> which
makes Christianity only a modified Judaism, the history of the resurrection
mere <q>humbug,</q> and the whole gospel story the result of the
<q>hallucinations</q> of the early Christians. The question whether <q>we</q>
are still Christians he answers openly and honourably in the negative.
He has also surmounted the standpoint of pantheism. The religion
of the nineteenth century is <emph>pancosmism</emph>, its gospel the results of
natural science with Darwin's discoveries as its bible, its devotional
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
works the national classics, its places of worship the concert rooms,
theatres, museums, etc. The most violent attacks on this book came
from the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign>. Strauss had said, <q>If the old faith is
absurd, then the modernized edition of the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign></q> and
the school of Jena is doubly, trebly so. The old faith only contradicts
reason, not itself; the new contradicts itself at every point, and how
can it then be reconciled with reason?</q><note place='foot'>Zeller, <q>David Frederick Strauss, in his Life and Writings.</q>
London, 1874. Translations: <q>Life of Jesus Critically Treated,</q>
1846; <q>Life of Jesus for the German People,</q> 1865; <q>The Old Faith
and the New,</q> 1874; <q>Ulrich von Hutten,</q> 1874.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>The Mediating Theology.</emph>&mdash;This tendency originated from the right
wing of the school of Schleiermacher, still influenced more or less by
the pectoralism of Neander. It adopted in dogmatics a more positive
and in criticism a more conservative manner. It earnestly sought to
promote the interests of the union not merely as a combination for
church government, but as a communion under a confessional consensus.
Its chief theological organs were the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Studien und Kritiken</foreign>,</q>
started in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1828, edited by Ullmann and Umbreit in Heidelberg,
afterwards by Riehm and Köstlin in Halle, and the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Jahrbücher für
deutsche Theologie</foreign></q> of Dorner and Leibner, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1856-1878.&mdash;Although
the mediating theology sought to sink all confessional differences,
denominational descent was more or less traceable in most of its
adherents. Its leading representatives from the <emph>Reformed church</emph> were:
<emph>Alexander Schweizer</emph>, who most faithfully preserved the critical tendency
of Schleiermacher, and, in a style far abler and subtler than any
other modern theologian, expounded the Reformed system of doctrine
in its rigid logical consistency. In his own system he gives a scientific
exposition of the evangelical faith from the unionist standpoint,
with many pious reflections on Scripture and the confession as well as
results of Christian experience, based upon the threefold manifestation
of God set forth without miracle in the physical order of the world,
in the moral order of the world, and in the historical economy of the
kingdom of God.&mdash;<emph>Sack</emph>, one of the oldest and most positive of Schleiermacher's
pupils, professor at Bonn, then superintendent at Magdeburg,
wrote on apologetics and polemics. <emph>Hagenbach</emph> of Basel, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1801-1874,
is well-known by his <q>Theological Encyclopædia and Methodology,</q>
<q>History of the Reformation,</q> and <q>History of the Church in the
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries,</q> all of which are translated into
English.&mdash;<emph>John Peter Lange</emph> of Bonn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1802-1884, a man of genius,
imaginative, poetic, and speculative, with strictly positive tendencies,
widely known by his <q>Life of Christ</q> and the commentary on Old
and New Testament, edited and contributed to by him.&mdash;<emph>Dr. Philip
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
Schaff</emph> may also be named as the transplanter of German theology of
the Neander-Tholuck type to the American soil. Born in Switzerland,
he accepted a call as professor to the theological seminary of the
German Reformed church at Mercersburg in 1843. He soon fell under
suspicion of heresy, but was acquitted by the Synod of New York in
1845. In 1869 he accepted a call to a professorship in the richly
endowed Presbyterian Union Theological Seminary of New York.
Writing first in German and afterwards in English, his works treat
of almost all the branches of theological science, especially in history
and exegesis. He is also president of several societies engaged in active
Christian work.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_10'/>
10. Among those belonging originally to the <emph>Lutheran church</emph> were
Schleiermacher's successor in Berlin, <emph>Twesten</emph>, whose dogmatic treatise
did not extend beyond the doctrine of God, a faithful adherent of
Schleiermacher's right wing on the Lutheran side; <emph>Nitzsch</emph>, professor
in Bonn <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1822-1847, and afterwards of Berlin till his death in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868, best known by his <q>System of Christian Doctrine,</q> and his
Protestant reply to Möhler's <q>Symbolism,</q> a profound thinker with a
noble Christian personality, and one of the most influential among the
consensus theologians. <emph>Julius Müller</emph> of Halle, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1801-1878, if we
except his theory of an ante-temporal fall, occupied the common
doctrinal platform of the confessional unionists. His chief work,
<q>The Christian Doctrine of Sin,</q> is a masterpiece of profound thinking
and original research. <emph>Ullmann</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1796-1865, professor in Halle
and Heidelberg, a noble and peace-loving character, distinguished
himself in the domain of history by his monograph on <q>Gregory
Nazianzen,</q> his <q>Reformers before the Reformation,</q> and most of all
by his beautiful apologetical treatise on the <q>Sinlessness of Jesus.</q>&mdash;<emph>Isaac
Aug. Dorner</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1809-1884, born and educated in Württemberg,
latterly professor in Berlin, applied himself mainly to the elaborating
of Christian doctrine, and gave to the world, in his <q>Doctrine of the
Person of Christ,</q> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1839, a work of careful historical research and
theological speculation. The fundamental ideas of his Christology
are the theory favoured by the <q>German</q> theology generally of the
necessity of the incarnation even apart from sin (which Müller strongly
opposed), and the notion of the archetypal Christ, the God-Man, as the
collective sum of humanity, in whom <q>are gathered the patterns of all
several individualities.</q> His <q>System of Christian Doctrine</q> formed
the copestone of an almost fifty years' academical career. Christ's
virgin birth is admitted as the condition of the essential union in Him
of divinity and humanity; but the incarnation of the Logos extends
through the whole earthly life of the Redeemer; it is first completed
in his exaltation by means of his resurrection; it was therefore an
operation of the Logos, as principle of all divine movement, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>extra
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
carnem</foreign>. His <q>System of Christian Ethics</q> was edited after his death
by his son.<note place='foot'>Simon, <q>Isaac August Dorner,</q> in <emph>Presbyterian Review</emph> for October,
1887, pp. 569-616.</note>&mdash;<emph>Richard Rothe</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1799-1867, appointed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1823 chaplain
to the Prussian embassy at Rome, where he became intimately
acquainted with Bunsen. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1828 he was made ephorus at the
preachers' seminary of Wittenberg, and afterwards professor in Bonn
and Heidelberg. Rothe was one of the most profound thinkers of the
century, equalled by none of his contemporaries in the grasp, depth,
and originality of his speculation. Though influenced by Schleiermacher,
Neander, and Hegel, he for a long time withdrew like an
anchoret from the strife of theologians and philosophers, and took up
a position alongside of Oetinger in the chamber of the theosophists.
His mental and spiritual constitution had indeed much in common
with that great mystic. In his first important work, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Die Anfänge
der chr. Kirche</foreign>,</q> he gave expression to the idea that in its perfected
form the church becomes merged into the state. The same thought
is elaborated in his <q>Theological Ethics,</q> a work which in depth,
originality, and conclusiveness of reasoning is almost unapproached,
and is full of the most profound Christian views in spite of its many
heterodoxies. In his later years he took part in the ecclesiastical
conflicts in Baden (<ref target='Section_196_Para_3'>§ 196, 3</ref>) with the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign> (<ref target='Section_180_Para_1'>§ 180, 1</ref>),
and entered the arena of public ecclesiastical life.<note place='foot'>Rothe, <q>Still Hours,</q> translated by Miss Stoddard, with Introductory
Essay on Rothe by Rev. J. Macpherson. London, 1886.</note>&mdash;<emph>Beyschlag</emph> of
Halle, in his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Christologie d. N. T.</foreign>,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1866, carried out Schleiermacher's
idea of Christ as only man, not God and man but the ideal
of man, not of two natures but only one, the archetypal human,
which, however, as such is divine, because the complete representation
of the divine nature in the human. From this standpoint, too, he
vindicates the authenticity of John's Gospel, and from Romans ix.-xi.
works out a <q>Pauline Theodicy.</q>&mdash;<emph>Hans Lassen Martensen</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1808-1884,
professor at Copenhagen, Bishop of Zealand and primate of
Denmark, with high speculative endowments and a considerable
tincture of theosophical mysticism, has become through his <q>Christian
Dogmatics,</q> <q>Christian Ethics,</q> in three vols., etc., of a thoroughly
Lutheran type, one of the best known theologians of the century.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_11'/>
11. Among <emph>Old Testament exegetes</emph> the most distinguished are:
<emph>Umbreit</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1795-1860, of Heidelberg, who wrote from the supernaturalist
standpoint, influenced by Schleiermacher and Herder,
commentaries on Solomon's writings and those of the prophets, and
on Job; <emph>Bertheau</emph> of Göttingen, of Ewald's school, wrote historico-critical
and philological commentaries on the historical books; and
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
<emph>Dillmann</emph>, Hengstenberg's successor in Berlin, specially distinguished
for his knowledge of the Ethiopic language and literature, has written
critical commentaries on the Pentateuch and Job.&mdash;Among <emph>New Testament
exegetes</emph> we may mention: <emph>Lücke</emph> of Göttingen, known by his
commentary on John's writings; <emph>Bleek</emph>, the able New Testament critic
and commentator on the Epistle to the Hebrews; <emph>Meyer</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1800-1873,
most distinguished of all, whose <q>Critical and Exegetical Commentary
on the New Testament,</q> begun in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1832, in which he was aided by
Huther, Lunemann, and Düsterdieck, is well-known in its English
edition as the most complete exegetical handbook to the New Testament;
<emph>Weiss</emph> of Kiel and Berlin, author of treatises on the doctrinal
systems of Peter and of John, <q>The Biblical Theology of the New
Testament,</q> <q>Life of Christ,</q> <q>Introduction to New Testament,</q>
revises and rewrites commentaries on Mark, Luke, John, and Romans,
in the last edition of the Meyer series.&mdash;A laborious student in the
domain of New Testament textual criticism was <emph>Constant. von Tischendorff</emph>
of Leipzig, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1815-1874, who ransacked all the libraries of
Europe and the East in the prosecution of his work. The publication
of several ancient codices, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cod. Sinaiticus</foreign>, a present from
the Sinaitic monks to the czar on the thousandth anniversary of
the Russian empire in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1862, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cod. Vaticanus N.T.</foreign>, a new
edition of the LXX., the most complete collection of New Testament
apocrypha and pseudepigraphs, and finally a whole series of editions
of the New Testament (from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1841-1873 there appeared twenty-four
editions, of which the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Editio Octava Major</foreign> of 1872 is the most
complete in critical apparatus), are the rich and ripe fruits of his
researches. A second edition, compared throughout with the recensions
of Tregelles and Westcott and Hort, was published by <emph>Von
Gebhardt</emph>, and a third volume of Prolegomena was added by C. R.
Gregory. As a theologian he attached himself, especially in later
years, to the Lutheranism of his Leipzig colleagues, and on questions
of criticism and introduction took up a strictly conservative position
as seen in his well known tract, <q>When were our Gospels written?</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_12'/>
12. Among the university teachers of his time <emph>John Tob. Beck</emph>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1804-1878, assumed a position all his own. After a pastorate
of ten years he began in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1836 his academical career in Basel,
and went in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1843 to Tübingen, where he opposed to the teaching
of Baur's school a purely biblical and positive theology, with a success
that exceeded all expectations. A Württemberger by birth, nature,
and training, he quite ignored the history of the church and its
dogmas as well as modern criticism, and set forth a system of theology
drawn from a theosophical realistic study of the Bible. He took little
interest in the excited movements of his age for home and foreign
missions, union, confederation, and alliances, in questions about liturgies,
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
constitution, discipline, and confessions, in all which he saw
only the form of godliness without the power. Better times could be
hoped for only as the result of the immediate interposition of God.
His <q>Pastoral Theology</q> and <q>Biblical Psychology</q> have been translated
into English.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_13'/>
13. <emph>The Lutheran Confessional Theology.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Sartorius</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1797-1859,
from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1822 professor in Dorpat, then from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835 general superintendent
at Königsberg, made fresh and vigorous attacks upon
rationalism, and supported the union as preserving <q>the true mean</q>
of Lutheranism. He is best known by his <q>Doctrine of Divine Love.</q>
<emph>Rudelbach</emph>,&mdash;a Dane by birth and finally settled in Copenhagen,
occupying the same ground, became a violent opponent of the union.&mdash;<emph>Guericke</emph>
of Halle, beginning as a pietist, passed through the union
into a rigorous Lutheran, and joined Rudelbach in editing the journal
afterwards conducted by Luthardt of Leipzig.&mdash;Alongside of these
older representatives of Lutheran orthodoxy there arose a <emph>second
generation</emph> which from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840 has fallen into several groups. Their
divergencies were mainly on two points: (1) On the place and significance
of the clerical order, some viewing it as based on the general
priesthood of believers and resting on the call of the congregation for
the orderly administration of the means of grace, others regarding
it as a divine institution, yet without adopting the Romanizing and
Anglican theory of apostolic succession; and (2) On the more important
question of biblical prophecy, where one party maintained
the spiritualistic, widely favoured since the time of Jerome, and
another party, attaching itself to Crusius and Bengel, insisted upon
a realistic interpretation.&mdash;At the head of the <emph>first group</emph>, which
maintained the old Protestant theory of church and office and looked
askance at chiliastic theories, supporting the old doctrines by all
available materials from modern science, stands <emph>Harless</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1806-1879,
professor in Erlangen and Leipzig, the chief ecclesiastical commissioner
in Dresden, and finally at Munich. His theological reputation
rests upon his <q>Commentary on Ephesians,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835, his
<q>Christian Ethics,</q> <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1842. Alongside of him <emph>Thomasius</emph> of Erlangen,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1802-1875, wrought in a similar direction.&mdash;<emph>Keil</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1807-1888, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1833 professor in Dorpat, since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1858 living
retired in Leipzig, of all Hengstenberg's students has most faithfully
preserved his master's exegetical and critical conservatism. He began
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1861 in connexion with Delitzsch his <q>Old Testament Commentary</q>
on strictly conservative lines. We have an English
translation of that work, and also of his <q>Introduction to the Old
Testament</q> and his <q>Old Testament Archæology.</q>&mdash;<emph>Philippi</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1809-1882, son of Jewish parents, during his academic career in
Dorpat, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1841-1852, exercised a powerful influence in securing for
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
strict Lutheranism a very widespread ascendency among the clergy
of Livonia. From <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1852 till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1882 he resided in
Rostock. As exegete and dogmatist, he has, like a John Gerhard
and Quenstedt of the nineteenth century, reproduced the Lutheran
theology of the seventeenth century, unmodified by the developments
of modern thought. He is known to English readers by his <q>Commentary
on Romans.</q> His chief work is <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kirchl. Glaubenslehre</foreign>,</q>
in six vols.&mdash;Alongside of him, and scarcely less important, stands
<emph>Theodosius Harnack</emph>, who went from Dorpat in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1853 to Erlangen,
but returned to Dorpat in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1866, and retired in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1873. He has
written upon the worship of the church of the post-apostolic age, on
Luther's theology, and practical theology.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_14'/>
14. At the head of the <emph>second group</emph>, characterized by a decided
biblical realism and inclined to a biblical chiliasm, stands <emph>Von Hofmann</emph>
of Erlangen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1810-1877, whose <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Weissagung und Erfüllung</foreign>,</q> 1841,
represents the very antipodes of Hengstenberg's view of the Old
Testament, placing history and prophecy in vital relation to one
another, and studying prophecy in its historical setting. In his
<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Schriftbeweis</foreign></q> we have an entirely new system of doctrine drawn
from Scripture, the doctrine of the atonement being set forth in quite
a different form from that generally approved, but vindicated by its
author against Philippi as <q>a new way of teaching old truth.</q> In
his commentary on the New Testament, he takes up a conservative
position on questions of criticism and introduction.&mdash;<emph>Franz Delitzsch</emph>,
in Rostock, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1846, Erlangen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1850, in Leipzig since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1867,
more intimately acquainted with rabbinical literature than any other
Christian theologian, became an enthusiastic adherent of Hofmann's
position. His theology, however, has a more decidedly theosophical
tendency, while his critical attitude is more liberal. He is well known
by his <q>Biblical Psychology,</q> commentary on Psalms, Isaiah, Solomon's
writings, Job, Hebrews, and a new commentary on Genesis in which
he accepts many of the positions of the advanced school of biblical
criticism.&mdash;<emph>Luthardt</emph> of Leipzig in the domain of New Testament
exegesis and dogmatics works from the standpoint of Hofmann. His
<q>Commentary on John's Gospel,</q> <q>Authorship of Fourth Gospel,</q>
and <q>Apologetical Lectures on the Fundamental, Saving and Moral
Truths of Christianity,</q> are well known.&mdash;Hofmann's conception of
Old Testament doctrine is admirably carried out by <emph>Oehler</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1812-1872,
with learning and speculative power, in his <q>Theology of the
Old Testament,</q> and in various important monographs on Old Testament
doctrines.&mdash;The most important representatives of the <emph>third
group</emph>, which strongly emphasizes the extreme Lutheran theory of
the church and office, are <emph>Kliefoth</emph> of Schwerin, liturgist and biblical
commentator; and <emph>Vilmar</emph>, who opened his academic career at Marburg,
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
in 1836, with a controversial programme entitled <q>The Theology of
Facts against the Theology of Rhetoric.</q> Vilmar's lectures, able,
though sketchy and incomplete, were published after his death in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868 by some of his disciples. To the same school belonged
<emph>Von Zezschwitz</emph> of Erlangen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1825-1886, whose <q><emph>Catechetics</emph></q> is a
treasury of solid learning.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_15'/>
15. Among Lutheran theologians taking little or nothing to do with
these controversial questions, <emph>Kahnis</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814-1888, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1850
professor at Leipzig, occupied a strict Lutheran confessional standpoint,
diverging only in the adoption of a subordinationist doctrine
on the person of Christ, a Sabellian theory of the Trinity, and a theory
of the Lord's supper in some points differing from that of the strict
Lutherans. His historical sketches are vigorous and lively.&mdash;<emph>Zöckler</emph>
of Giessen and Greifswald has made important contributions to church
history, exegesis, and dogmatics, and especially to the theory and
history of natural theology. In 1886 he began the publication of a
short biblical commentary contributed to by the most distinguished
positive theologians, he himself editing the New Testament and
Strack the Old Testament. It is to be in twelve vols., and is being
translated into English.&mdash;<emph>Von Oetingen</emph> of Dorpat has devoted himself
to social problems and moral statistics.&mdash;<emph>Frank</emph> of Erlangen has proved
a powerful apologist for old Lutheranism, and in his <q>System of
Christian Evidence</q> has introduced a new branch of theology, in
which the subjective Christian certitude which the believer has with
his faith is made the basis of the scientific exposition of the truth
set forth in his <q>System of Christian Truth,</q> a thoughtful and
speculative treatise on doctrine, followed by <q>The System of Christian
Morals</q> as the conclusion of his theological work.&mdash;Lutheran theology
had also zealous representatives in several distinguished jurists:
<emph>Göschel</emph>, president of the consistory of Magdeburg, who wrote against
Strauss, sought to derive profound Christian teaching from Goethe
and Dante, and wrote on the last things, and on man in respect of
body, soul, and spirit; <emph>Stahl</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1802-1861, professor of law at
Erlangen and Berlin, leader since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1849 of the high-church aristocratic
reactionary party in the Prussian chamber, supported his
views by reference to the Scripture doctrine of the divine origin
of magisterial authority.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_16'/>
16. As zealous representatives of <emph>Reformed Confessionalism</emph> who set
aside the dogma of predestination and so show no antagonism to the
union, may be named: <emph>Heppe</emph>, opponent of Vilmar in Marburg, who
devoted much of his career as a historian to the undermining of
Lutheranism, then wrought upon the histories of provincial churches,
of Catholic mysticism and pietism, etc.; and <emph>Ebrard</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1818-1887,
a brilliant believing theologian who combated rationalism and
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
Catholicism, professor from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1847 of Reformed theology at Erlangen,
known by his <q>Gospel History: a Compendium of Critical Investigations
in Support of the Historical Church of the Four Gospels,</q> his
<q>Apologetics,</q> in 3 vols., <q>Commentary on Hebrews,</q> etc.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_17'/>
17. <emph>The Free Protestant Theology.</emph>&mdash;This school originated in the left
wing of Schleiermacher's following, and has as its literary organs,
Hilgenfeld's <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zeitschrift</foreign> and the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Jahrbücher für prot. Theologie</foreign>.&mdash;The
distinguished statesman, <emph>Von Bunsen</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1791-1860, ambassador at
Rome and afterwards at London, at first stood at the head of the
revival of the church interests and life; but in his <q>Church of the
Future,</q> conceived a constitutional idea on a democratic basis, for
which he sought support in historical studies on the Ignatian age,
etc., and the historical refutation of the orthodox Christology and
trinitarianism. His elaborate work on <q>Egypt's Place in the
World's History,</q> full of arbitrary criticism, negative and positive,
on the chronological and historical data of the Old Testament, seeks
to show that, by restoring the Egyptian chronology, we for the first
time make the Bible history fit into general history. <q>The Signs of
the Times</q> comprise glowing philippics against the hierarchical pretensions
of Papists and even more dangerous Lutherans, insists on
Scripture being translated out of the Semitic into the Japhetic mode
of speech, to which end he devoted his last great works, <q>God in
History</q> and his <q>Bible Commentary,</q> the latter finished after his
death by Kamphausen and Holtzmann.&mdash;<emph>Schenkel</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1813-1885,
professor at Heidelberg from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1851 till his resignation in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1884,
from the right wing of the mediating school, through unionism and
Melanchthonianism advanced to the standpoint of his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Charakterbild
Jesu</foreign>,</q> which strips Christ of all supernatural features, yet proclaims
him the redeemer of the world, and strives to save his resurrection as
a historical and saving truth, and explains his appearances after the
resurrection as <q>real manifestations of the personality living and
glorified after death.</q> In later years he sought to draw yet more
closely to positive Christianity. <emph>Keim</emph> of Zürich and Giessen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1825-1878, the ablest of all recent historians of the life of Jesus,
and with all his radicalism preserving some conservative tendencies,
is best known by his <q>Jesus of Nazareth,</q> in six vols.&mdash;<emph>Holtzmann</emph> of
Heidelberg and Strassburg, passed from the mediating school over
to that of Tübingen, from which in important points he has now
departed.&mdash;To the same rank belongs <emph>Hausrath</emph> of Heidelberg, whose
<q>History of the New Testament Times</q> is well known. Under the
pseudonym of George Taylor he has composed several highly successful
historical romances.&mdash;The organs of this school are Hilgenfeld's
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zeitschrift</foreign>, and since 1875 the Jena <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Jahrbücher für protest. Theologie</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_18'/>
18. <emph>In the Old Testament Department</emph> a liberal critical school has
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
arisen which has reversed the old relation of <q>the law and the
prophets,</q> treating the origin of the law as post-exilian, and as
in not coming at the beginning, but at the end of the Jewish
history. <emph>Reuss</emph>, whose <q>History of the New Testament Books</q>
marked an epoch in New Testament introduction, was the first who
moved in this direction, in his lectures begun at Strassburg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1834, the results of which are given us in his <q>History of the Theology
of the Apostolic Age</q> and in his <q>History of the Canon.</q>
Meanwhile <emph>Vatke</emph> of Berlin had, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835, undertaken to prove that
the patriarchal religion was pure Semitic nature worship, and that
the prophets were the first to raise it into a monotheistic Jehovism.
Little success attended his efforts. Greater results were obtained by
Reuss' two pupils, <emph>Graf</emph> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1866, and <emph>Kayser</emph> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1874. The
most brilliant exposition of this theory was given by <emph>Julius Wellhausen</emph>
of Greifswald, transferred in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1882 to the Philosophical
Faculty of Halle, in his <q>History of Israel.</q> In his <q>Prolegomena to
History of Israel,</q> and article <q>Israel</q> in <q><emph>Encyclopædia Britannica</emph>,</q>
he gives expression with clearness and force to his radical negative
criticism, and develops a purely naturalist conception of the Old
Testament. Professor Kuenen of Leyden transplanted these views to
the Netherlands, and Robertson Smith has introduced them into
Scotland and England, while in Germany they are taught by a number
of the younger teachers, Stade in Giessen, Merx in Heidelberg, Smend
in Basel, etc. And now at last in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1882 the venerable master of the
school, <emph>Edward Reuss</emph>, has himself in his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Geschichte d. h. Schr. d. A.
Test.</foreign></q> given a brilliant and in many points modified exposition of
these radical theories. The history of Israel, according to him,
divides itself into the four successive periods of the heroes, of the
prophets, of the priests, and of the scribes, characterized respectively
by individualism, idealism, formalism, and traditionalism. Even
before the close of prophetism the priestly influence began to assert
itself, but it was only in the post-exilian period under the domination
of the priests that the construction and codification of the law
began to make impression on the Jewish people. So too in the age of
the kings there existed a Levitical tradition about rites and worship,
which traced back its first outlines to the time of Moses, though at
this period there could have been no written official codex of any
kind. In regard to Moses, we are to think not only of his person as
historical, but also of his career as that of a man inspired by the
divine spirit and recognised as such by his contemporaries and fellow-countrymen.&mdash;Also
<emph>Wellhausen</emph>, who has hitherto concerned himself
only with the critical introduction to the Old Testament books, not
with their historical or theological interpretation, supplied this defect
to some extent by his <q>Prolegomena to the History of Israel.</q> He
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
admits that much of the history of Israel related in the Old Testament
is credible. He even goes so far as to allow that this history was a
preparation and forerunner of Christianity, but without miracle and
prophecy, and without any immediate interposition of God in the
affairs of Israel.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_19'/>
19. Among the most distinguished free-thinking <emph>dogmatists</emph> of
recent times, <emph>Biedermann</emph> of Zürich, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1819-1885, has occupied the
most advanced position. His principal work, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Christliche Dogmatik</foreign>,</q>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1869, defined God and the origin of the world as the self-development
of the Absolute Idea according to the Hegelian scheme, recognises
in the person of Christ the first realization of the Christian principle
of the divine sonship in a personal life, then proceeds with free exposition
of the Scripture and church doctrines, and combats openly the
doctrines of the church and through them also those of Scripture, as
setting religion purely in the domain of the imagination.&mdash;<emph>Lipsius</emph>
of Leipzig, Kiel, and Jena, in his earliest treatise on the Pauline Doctrine
of Justification in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1853, held the position of the mediating
theology, but under the influence of Kant, Hegel, and Baur has been
led to adopt the standpoint of the <q>Free Protestant</q> school. His
history of gnosticism and his researches in early apocryphal literature
are important contributions to our knowledge of primitive Christianity.
His <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Lehrbuch d. ev. prot. Dogmatik</foreign>,</q> 1876, 2nd ed. 1879, on
the basis of Kant and Schleiermacher, fixing the limits of science
with the former, and maintaining with the latter the necessity of religious
faith and life, not rejecting metaphysics generally, but only its
speculations on God and divine things lying quite outside of human
experience, seeks from the common faith of the Christian church of
all ages, as it is expressed in the Scriptures and in the confessions, by
the application of the freest subjective criticism of the letter of revelation,
to secure a theory of the world in harmony with modern views.&mdash;<emph>Pfleiderer</emph>,
Twesten's successor in Berlin, in his <q>Paulinism,</q> <q>Influence
of Paul on Development of Christianity</q> and <q>History of the Philosophy
of Religion,</q> occupies more the Hegelian speculative standpoint
than that of Kantian criticism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_20'/>
20. <emph>Ritschl and his School.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Ritschl</emph>, 1822-1889, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1846 in
Bonn, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1864 in Göttingen, on his withdrawal from the Tübingen
party, applied himself to dogmatic studies and founded a school, the
adherents of which, divided into right and left wings, have secured
quite a number of academical appointments. After the completion of
his great dogmatic work on <q>Justification and Reconciliation,</q> Ritschl
resumed his historical studies in a <q>History of Pietism,</q> which he
traces back through the persecuted anabaptists of the Reformation
age to the Tertiaries of the Franciscan order and the mysticism of St.
Bernard. He earnestly maintains his adherence to the confessions of
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
the Lutheran church, and regards it as the task of his life to disentangle
the pure Lutheran doctrine from the accretions of scholastic
metaphysics. Even more decidedly than Schleiermacher, he banishes
all philosophy from the domain of theology. The grand significance
of Kant's doctrine of knowledge, with its assertion of the incomprehensibility
of all transcendent truth except the ethical postulates of God,
freedom and immortality, as set forth in a more profound manner by
Lotze, is indeed admitted, but only as a methodological basis of all
religious inquiries, and with determined rejection of every material
support from Kant's construction of religion within the limits of
the pure reason. Ritschl rather pronounces in favour of the formal
principle of Protestantism, and declares distinctly that all religious
truth must be drawn directly from Scripture, primarily from the New
Testament as the witness of the early church uncorrupted by the
Platonic-Aristotelian metaphysic, but also secondarily from the Old
Testament as the record of the content of revelation made to the
religious community of Israel. The truthfulness of the biblical,
especially of the New Testament, system of truth, rests, however, not
on any theory of inspiration, but on its being an authentic statement
of the early church of the doctrine of Christ, inasmuch as to this
witness the necessary degree of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>fides humana</foreign> belongs. Ritschl's
Christology rests on the witness of Christ to himself in the synoptists,
through which he proclaims himself the one prophet who in the
divine purpose of grace for mankind has received perfect consecration,
sent by God into the world to represent the founding of the kingdom
of God on earth foreshadowed in the Old Testament revelation; but
no attempt is made to explain how Christ became possessed of the
secrets of the divine decree. To him, as the first and only begotten
Son of God, standing in essential union with the Father, belongs the
attribute of deity and the right of worship. But of an eternal preexistence
of Christ we can speak only in so far as this is meant of the
eternal gracious purpose of God to redeem the world through him by
means of the complete unfolding of the kingdom of God in the fellowship
of love. Whatever goes beyond this in the fourth gospel, its
Johannine authenticity not being otherwise contested, as well as in
Paul's epistles and in the Epistle to the Hebrews, resulted from the
necessity felt by their writers for assigning a sufficient reason for the
assumption of such incomparable glory on the part of Christ. As
the archetype of humanity destined for the kingdom of God, Christ is
the original object of the divine love, so that the love of God to the
members of his kingdom comes to them only through him. And as
the earthly founding, so also the heavenly completion, of the kingdom
of God is assigned to Christ, and hence after his resurrection all power
was given to him, of the transcendent exercise of which, however, we
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
can know nothing. The universality of human sin is admitted by
Ritschl as a fact of experience, but he despairs of reaching any
dogmatic statement as to the origin of sin through the temptation of
a superhuman evil power. But that sin is inherited and as original
guilt is under the condemnation of God, is not taught or pre-supposed
by the teaching either of Christ or of the apostles. Redemption
(reconciliation and justification) consists in the forgiveness of sins,
by which the guilt that estranges from God is removed and the sinner
is restored into the fellowship of the kingdom of God. Forgiveness,
however, is not given on condition of the vicarious penal sufferings of
Christ, whose sufferings and death are of significance rather because
his life and works were a complete fulfilment of his calling, and
witnessed to as such by God's raising him from the dead. Justification
secures the reception of the penitent sinner into the fellowship of
the kingdom of God, preached and perfectly developed by Christ, and
the sonship enjoyed in its membership, prefigured in Christ himself,
which contains in itself the desire as well as the capacity to do good
works out of love to God.&mdash;The school of Ritschl is represented in
Göttingen by its founder and by <emph>Schultz</emph> and <emph>Wendt</emph>, in Marburg by
<emph>Herrmann</emph>, in Bonn by <emph>Bender</emph>, in Giessen by <emph>Gottschick</emph> and <emph>Kattenbusch</emph>,
in Strassburg by <emph>Lobstein</emph>, in Basel by <emph>Kaftan</emph>, formerly of
Berlin.<note place='foot'>Galloway, <q>The Theology of Ritschl,</q> in <emph>Presbyterian Review</emph> for
April, 1889, pp. 192-209.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_21'/>
21. Opponents and critics of the school of Ritschl, especially from
the confessional Lutheran ranks, have appeared in considerable numbers.
Luthardt of Leipzig in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1878 opened the campaign against
Ritschilianism, followed by Bestmann, charging it with undermining
Christianity. The Hanoverian synod of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1882 decided by a large
majority that the scientific results of theological science must be ruled
by the confessions of the evangelical church. The chief theme at the
following Hanoverian Pentecost Conference was the <q>Incarnation of
the Son of God,</q> the discussion being led by Professor Dieckhoff of
Rostock, against whom no voice was raised in favour of the views of
Ritschl. Not long after, Professor Fricke of Leipzig published a
lecture given by him at the Meissen Conference, on the Present Relations
of Metaphysics and Theology, followed by utterances of Kübel of
Tübingen, Grau of Königsberg, Kreibig and H. Schmidt at Berlin, all
unfavourable to Ritschl's theology.&mdash;The main objections are, according
to <emph>Bestmann</emph>: idolatry of Kant, depreciation of the religious factor in
Christianity in favour of the ethical by laying out a moral foreground
without providing a dogmatic background, reducing the objective
fundamental truths of the confession into subjective ethical ideas, etc.;
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
according to <emph>Luthardt</emph>: Ritschl's position that it does not matter so
much what the facts of the Christian faith are in themselves, as what
they mean for us, makes his whole dogmatic system hang in the air,
if in Christianity we have to do not with what God, Christ, the
resurrection are, but only what significance we attach to them,
Christianity is stript of all importance, the significance of a thing
must have its foundation in the thing itself, etc.; according to
<emph>Dieckhoff</emph>: Ritschl on his accepting the divinity of Christ lays down
the rule that the special content of what is meant by the term divinity
must be transferable to the believer, and so for Ritschl, Christ is a
mere man who in his person was the first to represent a relation to
God which is destined for all men in like measure, etc.; according to
<emph>Fricke</emph>: new Kantian scepticism with regard to ideals and transcendentals,
reducing religious elements to moral, with Ritschl's removal
of all metaphysical facts the chief verities of our Christian faith are
taken away, at least in the scientific form in which we have them, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
the doctrine of the Trinity, our Christology, our theory of satisfaction,
in place of which comes the Catholic <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>justitia infusa</foreign>, etc.; according to
<emph>Münchmayer</emph>: <q>the object of justification with Ritschl is not the
individual but the community, it is no act of God upon the individual
but an eternal purpose of God for the community, its effect on the
individual is not objective divine forgiveness of guilt but a subjective
act of incorporation of the individual into the redeemed community;
Christ and his work are not the ground of justification, but only the
means of revealing the eternal justifying will of God, and therefore
finally a continuation of the historical work of Christ by means of
his church takes the place of the personal intercession of the exalted
Redeemer for the penitent sinner.</q> Kreibig and Schmidt express
themselves in a similar manner.&mdash;Ritschl has not himself undertaken
any reply, but his disciples have sought to remove what they regard
as misunderstandings, and generally to vindicate the system of their
master.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_182_Para_22'/>
22. <emph>Writers on Constitutional Law and History.</emph>&mdash;The most distinguished
writers on the constitutional law of the church are Eichhorn
and Dove of Göttingen, Jacobsen of Königsberg, Wasserschleben
of Giessen, Richter and Hinschius of Berlin, Friedberg of Leipzig,
who belong to the unionist party; while Bickell of Marburg, Mejer of
Göttingen and Hanover, Von Scheuerl of Erlangen, and Sohm of
Strassburg belong to the confessional Lutherans.&mdash;Of ecclesiastical
historians (§ 5, 4, 5) the number is so great that we cannot even
enumerate their names.&mdash;The <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Theologische Literaturzeitung</foreign></q> of
Schürer and Harnack is a liberal scientific journal, distinguished for
its fair criticisms by writers whose names are given.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_183'/>
<head>§ 183. Home Missions.</head>

<p>
In regard to home mission work, the Protestant church
long lagged behind the Catholic, which had wrought
vigorously through its monkish orders. England first
entered with zeal into the field, especially dissenters and
members of the low church party, and subsequently also the
high church ritualistic party (§ 202, <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_202_Para_3'>3</ref>), which now takes
an active interest in this work. Germany, in view of the
scanty means at the disposal of the pietists and the church
party, made noble efforts. In other continental countries,
but especially in North America, much was done for home
missions. Soon the whole Protestant world began to
organize benevolent and evangelistic institutions. The
laborious Wichern, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1849, went through all Germany
to arouse interest in home missions, and started a yearly
congress on the subject in Wittenberg. Till his death
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1881, Wichern continued to direct this congress
and further the interests which it represented.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_183_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Institutions.</emph>&mdash;The earliest charity school was that founded at
Düsselthal by Count Recke-Volmarstein, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1816, followed by
Zeller's at Beuggen in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1820. One of the most famous of these
institutions was the <emph>Rauhe Haus</emph> of Wichern, at Horn, near Hamburg,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1833.<note place='foot'>Series of papers in <emph>Good Words</emph> for 1860, pp. 377 ff.</note> Fliedner's Deaconess Institut at Kaiserswerth is the pride
of the evangelical church. It has now 190 branches, with 625 sisters,
in the four continents. There are many independent institutions
modelled upon it in Germany, England, Sweden, Norway, Denmark,
Russia, and France. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1881 there were in Germany 31, and in
the cities of other lands 22, principal deaconess institutions of this
German order, with 4,751 sisters and 1,491 fields of labour outside of
the institution. The original institute of Kaiserswerth comprises a
hospital with 600 patients, a refuge for fallen women and liberated
prisoners, an orphanage for girls, a seminary for governesses, and a
home for female imbeciles.<note place='foot'>Fleming Stevenson, <q>The Blue Flag of Kaiserswerth,</q> in <emph>Good
Words</emph> for 1861, pp. 121 ff., 143 ff.</note> Löhe founded the deaconess institute of
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
<emph>Neuendettelsau</emph>, on strict Lutheran principles, with hospital, girls'
school, and asylum for imbecile children. In France a most successful
institution was founded by pastor Bost of Laforce, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848, for
foundlings, imbeciles, and epileptics. In England, George Müller, a
poor German student of Halle, a pupil of Tholuck, beginning in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1832, founded at Bristol five richly endowed orphanages after the pattern
of that of A. H. Francke, in which thousands of destitute street
children have been educated, and for this and other purposes has spent
nearly £1,000,000 without ever asking any one for a contribution,
acting on the belief that <q>the God of Elijah still lives.</q> The London
City Mission employs 600 missionaries. In New York, since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1855,
about 60,000 street children have been placed, by the Society for Poor
Children, in Christian families, and 21 Industrial schools are maintained
with 10,000 scholars.&mdash;Tract Societies in London, Hamburg,
Berlin, etc., send out millions of tracts for Christian instruction and
awakening. The Society for North Germany successfully pursues a
similar work; the Calw Publication Society circulates Christian text-books
with woodcuts at a remarkably small price. In Berlin the
Evangelical Book Society issues reprints of the older tracts on practical
divinity. Christian women, like the English Quakeress Elizabeth
Fry, the noble Amalie Sieveking of Hamburg, Miss Florence Nightingale,
the heroine of the Crimean war, and the brave Maria Simon of
Dresden, who organized the female nursing corps of the wars of 1866,
1870, 1871, helped on the work of home missions in all lands, especially
in the departments of tending the poor and the sick.
</p>

<p>
2. The <emph>Order of St. John</emph>, secularized in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1810, was reorganized
by Frederick William IV. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1852 into an association for the
care of the sick and poor. Under a grand-master it has 350 members
and 1,500 associates. Its revenues are formed from entrance fees and
annual contributions. It has thirty hospitals. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1861 it founded
a hospital for men in Beyrout during the persecution of Christians
in Syria, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868 gave aid during the famine that followed
the typhus epidemic in East Prussia, and did noble service in the
wars of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1864, 1866, and 1870.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_183_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Itinerant Preacher Gustav Werner in Württemberg.</emph>&mdash;Abandoning
his charge in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840, Werner began his itinerant labours, and
during the year formed more than a hundred groups of adherents
over all Württemberg. His preaching was allegorical and eschatological,
and avoided the doctrines of satisfaction and justification.
On his repudiating the Augsburg Confession, the church boards
refused to recognise him, and he went hither and thither preaching a
Christian communism. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1842 he bought a site in Reutlingen,
built a house, and founded a school for eighty children. In order to
develop his views of carrying on industrial arts on a Christian basis,
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
he bought, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1850, the paper factory at Reutlingen for £4,000,
and subsequently transferred it to Dettingen on a larger scale, at
an outlay of £20,000. By <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1862 he had established no less than
twenty-two branches, in which manufacturing was carried on, with
institutions of all kinds for education, pastoral work, rescuing the
lost and raising the fallen. Each member lives and works for the
whole; none receives wages; surplus income goes to increase the
number and extent of the institutions. Vast multitudes of sunken
and destitute families have been by these means restored to respectable
social positions and to a moral religious life.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_183_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Bible Societies.</emph>&mdash;The Bible societies constitute an independent
branch of the home mission. Modern efforts to circulate Scripture
began in England. As a necessary adjunct to missionary societies,
the great British and Foreign Bible Society was founded in London
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1804, embracing all Protestant sects, excepting the Quakers.
It circulates Bibles without note or comment. The Apocryphal
controversy of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1825-1827 resulted in the society resolving not to
print the Apocrypha in its issues. In consequence of this decision,
fifty German societies, including the present society of Berlin, seceded.
The New York Association, founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1817, is in thorough accord
with the London society. The Baden Missionary Society revived the
discussion in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1852 by making it the subject of essay for a prize,
which was won by the learned work of Keerl, who, along with the
stricter Lutherans, condemned the Apocrypha. The other side was
taken by Stier and Hengstenberg, and most of the consistories advised
adherence to the old practice, as all misunderstanding was prevented
by Luther's preface and the prohibition against using passages from
the Apocrypha as sermon texts.&mdash;Bible societies altogether have issued
during the century 180,000,000 Bibles and New Testaments in 324
different languages.<note place='foot'>Owen, <q>History of the First Ten Years of the Bible Society.</q>
3 vols. London, 1816.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_184'/>
<head>§ 184. Foreign Missions.</head>

<p>
Protestant zeal for missions to the heathen has gone on
advancing since the end of last century (<ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>§ 172, 5</ref>). Missionary
societies increase from year to year. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1883
there were seventy independent societies with innumerable
branches, which contribute annually about £1,500,000, or
five times as much as the Romish church, and maintain
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
2,000 mission stations, 2,940 European and American
missionaries, and 1,000 ordained native pastors and 25,000
native teachers and assistants, having under their care
2,214,000 converts from heathenism. In missionary enterprise
England holds the first place, next comes America,
and then Germany. Among Protestant sects the Methodists
and Baptists are most zealous in the cause of missions,
and the Moravian Brethren have wrought most successfully
in this department. The missions also did much to prepare
the way for the suppression of the slave trade by the
European powers in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830, and the emancipation of all
slaves in the British possessions in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1834, at a cost of
£20,000,000. The noble English philanthropist, William
Wilberforce, unweariedly laboured for these ends.&mdash;Also
in England, Germany, Russia, and France new associations
were formed for missions to the Jews, and the work was
carried on with admirable patience, though the visible
results were very small.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_184_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Missionary Societies.</emph>&mdash;The great American Missionary Society
was founded at Boston in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1810, the English Wesleyan in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814,
the American Methodist in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1819, the American Episcopal in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1820, and the Society of Paris in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1824. The new German societies
were on confessional lines: that of Basel in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1816, of Berlin in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1823, the Rhenish with the mission seminary at Barmen in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1829, the North German, on the basis of the Augsburg Confession,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1836. The Dresden Society, which resumed the old Lutheran
work in the East Indies (<ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>§ 167, 9</ref>), founded a seminary at Leipzig in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1849, in order to get the benefit of the university. Lutheran
societies, mostly affiliated with that of Leipzig, were started in Sweden,
Denmark, Norway, Russia, Bavaria, Hanover, Mecklenburg, Hesse, and
America. The Neuendettelsau Institute wrought through the Iowa
Synod among the North American Indians, and through the Immanuel
Synod among the aborigines of Australia. The Hermannsburg
Institute under Harms prosecuted mission work with great zeal. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1853, Harms sent out in his own mission ship eight missionaries
and as many Christian colonists. It has been objected to this mission,
that endeavours after social elevation and industrial training have
driven to the background the main question of individual conversion.&mdash;The
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
advanced liberal school in Switzerland and Germany sought
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1883 to start a mission on their own particular lines. They
do not propose any opposition to existing agencies, and intend to
make their first experiment among the civilized races of India and
Japan.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_184_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Europe and America.</emph>&mdash;The Swedish mission in Lapland (<ref target='Section_160_Para_7'>§ 160, 7</ref>)
was resumed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1825 by Stockfleth. The Moravians carried on
their work among the Eskimos in Greenland, which had now become
a wholly Christian country, and also in Labrador, which was almost
in the same condition. The chaplain of the Hudson Bay Company,
J. West, founded a successful mission in that territory in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1822.
Among the natives and negro slaves in the British possessions, the
United States, and West Indies, Moravians, Methodists, Baptists, and
Anglican Episcopalians patiently and successfully carried on the
work. Among the natives and bush negroes, descendants of runaway
slaves, in Guiana, the Moravians did a noble work.&mdash;Catholic South
America remained closed against Protestant missions. But the
ardent zeal of Capt. Allen Gardiner led him to choose the inhospitable
shores of Patagonia as a field of labour. He landed there in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1850
with five missionaries, but in the following year their corpses only
were found. The work, however, was started anew in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1856, and
prosecuted with success under the direction of an Anglican bishop.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_184_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Africa.</emph>&mdash;The Moravians have laboured among the Hottentots,
the Berlin missionaries among the wild Corannas, and the French
Evangelical Society among the Bechuanas. Hahn of Livonia is the
apostle of the Hereros. On the East Coast the London Missionary
Society has wrought among the warlike Kaffirs, and other British
societies are labouring in Natal among the Zulus. On the West
Coast the English colony of Sierra Leone was founded for the settling
and Christianizing of liberated slaves, and farther south is Liberia,
a similar American colony; both in a flourishing condition, under the
care of Methodists, Baptists, and Anglican Episcopalians. The Basel
missionaries labour on the Gold Coast, Baptists in Old Calabar, and
the American and North German Societies on the Gaboon River.&mdash;The
London missionaries won Radama of Madagascar to Christianity
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1818, but his successor Ranavalona instituted a bloody persecution
of the Christians in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835, during which David Jones, the
apostle of the Malagassy, suffered martyrdom in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1843. In the
island of Mauritius, where there is an Anglican bishop, many Malagassy
Christians found refuge. After the queen's death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1861,
her Christian son Radama II. recalled the Christian exiles and the
missionaries. He soon became the victim of a palace revolution.
His wife and successor Rosaherina continued a heathen till her death
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868, but put no obstacle in the way of the gospel. But her
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
cousin Ranavalona II. overthrew the idol worship, was baptized in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1869, and in the following year burned the national idols.
Protestantism now made rapid strides, till interrupted by French
Jesuit intrigues, which have been favoured by the recent French
occupation.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_184_Para_4'/>
4. Livingstone and Stanley have made marvellous contributions
to our geographical knowledge of <emph>Central Africa</emph> and to Christian
missions there. The Scottish missionary, David Livingstone, factory
boy, afterwards physician and minister, wrought, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840-1849,
under the London Missionary Society in South Africa, and then
entered on his life work of exploration in Central Africa. During
his third exploring journey into the interior in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1865 as a British
consul, he was not heard of for a whole year. H. M. Stanley, of the
<emph>New York Herald</emph>, was sent in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871, and found him in Ujiji on
Lake Tanganyiká. Livingstone died of dysentery on the southern bank
of this lake in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1873. Still more important was Stanley's second
journey, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1874-1877, which yielded the most brilliant scientific
results, and was epoch-making in the history of African missions.
He got the greatest potentate in those regions, King Mtesa of Uganda,
who had been converted by the Arabs to Mohammedanism, to adopt
Christianity and permit a Christian church to be built in his city.
Stanley's letters from Africa roused missionary fervour throughout
England. The Church Missionary Society in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1877 set up a
mission station in the capital, and put a steamer on the Victoria
Nyanza. The church services were regularly attended, education
and the work of civilization zealously prosecuted, Sunday labour and
the slave trade prohibited, etc. French Jesuits entered in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1879,
insinuating suspicions of the English missionaries into the ear of
the king, and the machinations of the Arab slave-dealers made their
position dangerous. Missionaries arrived by way of Egypt with
flattering recommendations from the English foreign secretary in
the name of the queen. But the traders, by means of an Arabic
translation of a letter purporting to be from the English consul at
Zanzibar, cast suspicion on the document as a forgery, and represented
its bearers as in the pay of the hostile Egyptians. Mtesa's
wrath knew no bounds, and only his favour for the missionary
physician saved the mission and led him to send an embassy of three
chiefs and two missionaries to England in June, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1879, to discover
the actual truth. His anger meanwhile cooled, and the work of the
mission was resumed. He was preparing to put an utter end to the
national heathenism, when suddenly a report spread that the greatest
of all the Lubaris or inferior deities, that of the Nyanza Lake, had
become incarnate in an old woman, in order to heal the king and
restore the ancient religion. The whole populace was in an uproar;
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
Mtesa, under threat of deposition, restored heathenism, with human
sacrifice, man stealing, and the slave trade. Then the Lubari excitement
cooled down. Mtesa, moved by a dream, declared himself again
a Mohammedan, and converted the Christian church into a mosque.
The English missionaries, stripped of all means, starved, and subjected
to all sorts of privations, did not flinch. At last, in January, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1881, the embassy, sent eighteen months before to England, reached
home again, and, by the story of their reception, caused a revulsion
of feeling in favour of the English mission, which again flourished
under the protection of the king. But Mtesa died in 1884. His son
and successor, Mwanga, a suspicious, peevish young despot, addicted
to all forms of vice, began again the most cruel persecution, of which
Bishop Hannington, sent out from England, with fifty companions,
were the victims. Only four escaped.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_184_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Asia.</emph>&mdash;The most important mission field in Asia is <emph>India</emph>. The
old Lutheran mission there had great difficulties to contend against:
the system of caste distinctions, the proud self-sufficiency of the
pantheistic Brahmans, the politico-commercial interests of the East
India Company, etc. The Leipzig Society has sixteen stations among
the Tamuls, and alongside are English, American, and German missionaries
of every school. The Gossner Society works among the
Kohls of Chota Nagpore, where a rival mission has been started by
the puseyite bishop of Calcutta, Dr. Milman, to which, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868,
six of the twelve German missionaries and twelve of the thirty-six
chapels were transferred. The Basel missionaries labour in Canara
and Malabar. The military revolt in Northern India in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1857
interrupted missionary operations for two years; but the work was
afterwards resumed with great vigour. The Christian benevolence
shown during the famine of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1878, in which three millions perished,
made a great impression in favour of the Protestant church. In the
preceding years throughout all India only between 5,000 and 10,000
souls were annually added; but in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1878 the number of new converts
rose to 100,000, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1879 there were 44,000.&mdash;The island
of <emph>Ceylon</emph> was, under Portuguese and Dutch, rule, in great part
nominally Christianized; but when compulsion was removed under
British rule, this sham profession was at an end. Multitudes fell
back into heathenism, and in the first ten years of the British
dominion 900 new idol temples were erected. From <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1812 Baptist,
Methodist, and Anglican missionaries have toiled with small appearance
of fruit. In <emph>Farther India</emph> the American missionaries have
wrought since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1813. Judson and his heroic wife did noble work
among the Karens and the Burmans. Also in Malacca, Singapore,
and Siam the Protestant missions have had brilliant success. The
work in Sumatra has been retarded by the opposition of the Malays
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
and deadly malarial fever. The preaching of the gospel was eminently
successful in <emph>Java</emph>, where since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814 Baptist missionaries
and agents of the London Society have wrought heroically. In Celebes
the Dutch missionaries found twenty Christian congregations of old
standing, greatly deteriorated for want of pastoral care, but still
using the Heidelberg Catechism. At Banjermassin, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1835 the
Rhenish Society founded their first station in Borneo, and wrought
not unsuccessfully among the heathen Dyaks. But in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1859 a
rebellion of the Mohammedan residents led to the expulsion of the
Dutch and the murder of all Christians. Only a few of the missionaries
escaped martyrdom, and subsequently settled in Sumatra.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_184_Para_6'/>
6. The work in <emph>China</emph> began in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1807, when the London Missionary
Society settled Morrison in Canton, where he began the study
of the language and the translation of the Bible. Gutzlaff of
Pomerania, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1826, conceived the plan of evangelizing China
through the Chinese converts, but, though he continued his efforts
till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1854, the scheme failed through the unworthiness
of many of the professors. The war against the opium traffic, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1839-1842, opened five ports to the mission, and led to the transference
of Hongkong to the English. The Chinese mission now made rapid
strides; but the interior was still untouched. The conflict between
the governor of Canton and the English, French, and Americans, and
the chastisement administered to the Chinese in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1857, led the
emperor, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1858, to make a treaty with the three powers and also
with Russia, by which the whole land was opened up for trade and
missions, and full toleration granted to Christianity. Popular hatred
of strangers, and especially of missionaries, however, occasioned frequently
bloody encounters, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870 there was a furious
outburst directed against the French missionaries. During a terrible
famine in North China, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1878, when more than five millions
perished, the heroic and self-sacrificing conduct of the missionaries
brought them into high favour. Throughout China there are now
320 organized Christian congregations with 50,000 adherents under
238 foreign missionaries.&mdash;After seclusion for three centuries, <emph>Japan</emph>,
about the same time as China, was opened by treaty to European and
American commerce, notwithstanding the opposition of the old feudal
nobility, the so-called Daimios. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871 the mikado's government
succeeded in overcoming completely the power of the daimios
and setting aside the shiogun or military vizier, who had exercised
supreme executive power. European customs were introduced, but
the rigorous enactments against native converts to Christianity were
still enforced. A cruel persecution of native Christians was carried
on in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1867, but the Protestant missionaries continued to work
unweariedly, preparing dictionaries and reading books. The Buddhist
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
priests sought to get up a rival mission to send agents to America
and Europe, whereas many of the leading newspapers expressed the
opinion that Japan must soon put Christianity in the place of Buddhism
as the state religion.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_184_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Polynesia and Australia.</emph>&mdash;The flourishing Protestant church of
Tahiti, the largest and finest of the Society Islands (<ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>§ 172, 5</ref>), suffered
from the appearance of two French Jesuits in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1836. When Queen
Pomare compelled them to withdraw, the French government, resenting
this as an indignity to their nation, sent a fleet to attack the
defenceless people, proclaimed a French protectorate, and introduced
not only Catholic missionaries, but European vices. Amid much
persecution, however, the Protestants held their own. In December,
1880, Pomare V. resigned, and the Society Islands became a dependency
of France.&mdash;In the south-east groups great opposition was
shown, but in the north-west Christianity made rapid progress.
The island of Raiatea was the centre of the South Sea missions.
There from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1819 John Williams, the apostle of the South Seas,
wrought till he met a martyr's death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1839. He went from
place to place in a mission ship built by his own hands. The Harvey
Group were Christianized in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1821, and the Navigator Group in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830. The French took the Marquesas Islands in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1838, and
introduced Catholic missionaries. The attempt to evangelize the
New Hebrides led to the death of Williams and two of his companions.
Missionaries of the London Society, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1797-1799, had failed in the
Friendly Islands through the savage character of the natives, but
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1822 the Methodists made a successful start. The gospel was
carried thence to Fiji, which is now under British rule. Both groups
have become almost wholly Christianized. The <emph>Sandwich Islands</emph> form
a third mission centre, wrought by the American board. Kamehameha I.
gladly adopted the elements of Christian civilization,
though rejecting Christianity: while his successor Kamehameha II.
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1829 abolished tabu and overthrew the idol temples. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1851 Christianity was adopted as the national religion. The work
was more difficult in <emph>New Zealand</emph>, where the Church Missionary
Society, represented by Samuel Marsden, the apostle of New Zealand,
began operations in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814. For ten years the position of the missionaries
was most hazardous; yet they held on, and the conversion
of the most bloodthirsty of the chiefs did much to advance their
cause. In New Guinea the London Society has been making steady
progress. Among the stolid natives of the continent of New Holland,
the so called Papuans, the labours of the Moravians since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1849
have not yielded much fruit. Since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1875 the German-Australian
Immanuel Synod, supported by Neuendettelsau, has laboured for the
conversion of the heathen in the inland districts.
</p>

<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_184_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>Missions to the Jews.</emph>&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1809 the London Society for Promoting
Christianity among the Jews (<ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>§ 172, 5</ref>) was formed by a union
of all denominations, but soon passed into the hands of the Anglicans.
By the circulation of the Scriptures and tracts, and by the sending out
of missionaries, mostly Jewish converts, the work was persevered in
amid many discouragements. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1818 Poland was opened to its
missionaries, and there some 600 Jews were baptized. The society
carried on its operations also in Germany, Holland, France, and
Turkey. The work in Poland was interrupted by the Crimean war,
and was not resumed till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1875. In Bessarabia Faltin has
laboured successfully among the Jews since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860. He was joined
in the work in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1867 by the converted Rabbi Gurland, who had
studied theology at Halle and Berlin. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871 Gurland accepted
a call to similar work in Courland and Lithuania, and since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1876
has been Lutheran pastor at Mitau. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1841 the evangelical
bishopric of St. James was founded in Jerusalem by the English and
Prussian governments conjointly, presentations to be made alternately,
but the ordination to be according to the Anglican rite. The first
bishop was Alexander, a Jewish convert. He died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1845 and
was succeeded by the zealous missionary Gobat, elected by the
Prussian government. He died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1879 and was succeeded by
Barclay, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1881. It was now again Prussia's turn to
make an appointment. The English demand to have Lutheran
ministers ordained successively deacon, presbyter, and bishop had
given offence, and so no new appointment has been made. In June
1886 the English-Prussian compact was formally cancelled and a proposal
made to found an independent Prussian Evangelical bishopric.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_184_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>Missions among the Eastern Churches.</emph>&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1815 the Church
Missionary Society founded a missionary emporium in the island of
Malta, as a tract depôt for the evangelizing the East; and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1846
the Malta Protestant College was erected for training native missionaries,
teachers, physicians, etc., for work in the various oriental
countries. In the Ionian islands, in Constantinople, and in Greece,
British and American missionaries began operations in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1819 by
erecting schools and circulating the scriptures. At first the orthodox
clergy were favourable, but as the work progressed they became
actively hostile, and only two mission schools in Syra and Athens
were allowed to continue. In Syria the Americans made Beyrout
their head quarters in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1824, but the work was interrupted by the
Turco-Egyptian conflicts. Subsequently, however, it flourished more
and more, and, before the Syrian massacre of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860 (<ref target='Section_207_Para_2'>§ 207, 2</ref>), there
were nine prosperous stations in Syria. The founding of the Jerusalem
bishopric in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1841, and the issuing of the Hatti-Humayun in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1856 (<ref target='Section_207_Para_2'>§ 207, 2</ref>), induced the Church Missionary Society to make
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
more vigorous efforts which, however, were afterwards abandoned for
want of success. Down to the outbreak of the persecution of Syrian
Christians in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860, this society had five flourishing stations.
From <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1831 the Americans had wrought zealously and successfully
among the Armenians in Constantinople and neighbourhood, but in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1845 the Armenian patriarch excited a violent persecution which
threatened the utter overthrow of the work. The British ambassador,
Sir Stratford de Redcliffe, however, insisted upon the Porte recognising
the rights of the Protestant Armenians as an independent religious
denomination, and since then the missions have prospered. Among
the Nestorians in Turkey and Persia the Americans, with Dr. Grant
at their head, began operations in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1834; but through Jesuit
intrigues the suspicions of the Kurds and Turks were excited, and in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1843 and 1846 a war of extermination was waged against the
mountain Nestorians, which annihilated the Protestant missions
among them. Operations, however, have been recommenced with
encouraging success. Among the deeply degraded Copts in Egypt,
and extending from them into Abyssinia, the Moravians had been
working without any apparent result from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1752 to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1783. In
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1826 the Church Missionary Society, under German missionaries
trained at Basel (Gobat, Irenberg, Krapf, etc.), took up the work, till
it was stopped by the government in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1837. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1855 the
Basel missionaries began again to work in Abyssinia with the approval
of King Theodore. This state of things soon changed. Theodore's
ambition was to conquer Egypt and overthrow Islam. But when in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1863 this scheme only called forth threats from London and Paris,
he gave loose rein to his natural ferocity and put the English consul
and the German missionaries in chains. By means of an armed expedition
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868, England compelled the liberation of the prisoners,
and Theodore put an end to his own life. After the withdrawal of
the English the country was desolated by civil wars, and at the close
of these troubles in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1878 the mission resumed its operations.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. Catholicism in General.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_185'/>
<head>§ 185. The Papacy and the States of the Church.</head>

<p>
The papacy, humiliated but not destroyed by Napoleon I.,
was in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814 by the aid of princes of all creeds restored
to the full possession of its temporal and spiritual authority,
and amid many difficulties it reasserted for the most part
successfully its hierarchical claims in the Catholic states and
in those whose Protestantism and Catholicism were alike
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
tolerated. Many severe blows indeed were dealt to the
papacy even in the Roman states by revolutionary movements,
yet political reaction generally by-and-by put the
church in a position as good if not better than it had before.
But while on this side the Alps, especially since the outbreak
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848, ultramontanism gained one victory after
another in its own domain, in Italy, it suffered one humiliation
after another; and while the Vatican Council, which
put the crown upon its idolatrous assumptions (<ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>§ 189, 3</ref>),
was still sitting, the whole pride of its temporal sovereignty
was shattered: the States of the Church were struck out of
the number of the European powers, and Rome became the
capital and residence of the prince of Sardinia as king of
United Italy. But reverence for the pope now reached a
height among catholic nations which it had never anywhere
attained before.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_185_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The First Four Popes of the Century.</emph>&mdash;Napoleon as First Consul of
the French Republic, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1801 concluded a concordat with <emph>Pius
VII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1800-1823, who under Austrian protection was elected pope
at Venice, whereby the pope was restored to his temporal and spiritual
rights, but was obliged to abandon his hierarchical claims over the
church of France (<ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>§ 203, 1</ref>). He crowned the consul emperor of the
French at Paris in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1804, but when he persisted in the assertion
of his hierarchical principles, Napoleon in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1808 entered the papal
territories, and in May, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1809, formally repudiated the donation of
<q>his predecessor</q> Charlemagne. The pope treated the offered payment
of two million francs as an insult, threatened the emperor with
the ban, and in July, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1809, was imprisoned at Savona, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1812 was taken to Fontainebleau. He refused for a time to give
canonical institution to the bishops nominated by the emperor, and
though at last he yielded and agreed to reside in France, he soon
withdrew his concession, and the complications of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1813 constrained
the emperor, on February 14th, to set free the pope and the
Papal States. In May the pope again entered Rome. One of his first
official acts was the restoration of the Jesuits by the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sollicitudo
omnium</foreign>, as by the unanimous request of all Christendom. The Congregation
of the Index was again set up, and during the course of the
year 737 charges of heresy were heard before the tribunal of the holy
office. All sales of church property were pronounced void, and 1,800
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
monasteries and 600 nunneries were reclaimed. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1815 the
pope formally protested against the decision of the Vienna Congress,
especially against the overthrow of the spiritual principalities in the
German empire (<ref target='Section_192_Para_1'>§ 192, 1</ref>). Equally fruitless was his demand for the
restoration of Avignon (<ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>§ 165, 15</ref>). In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1816 he condemned the
Bible societies as a plague to Christendom, and renewed the prohibition
of Bible translations. His diplomatic schemes were determined
by his able secretary Cardinal Consalvi, who not only at the Vienna
Congress, but also subsequently by several concordats secured the
fullest possible expression to the interests and claims of the curia.&mdash;His
successor was <emph>Leo XII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1823-1829, who, more strict in his
civil administration than his predecessor, condemned Bible societies,
renewed the Inquisition prosecutions, for the sake of gain celebrated
the jubilee in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1825, ordered prayers for uprooting of heresy,
rebuilt the Ghetto wall of Rome, overturned during the French rule
(§ 95, 3), which marked off the Jews' quarter, till Pius IX. again
threw it down in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1846. After the eight months' reign of <emph>Pius
VIII.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1829-1830, <emph>Gregory XVI.</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1831-1846, ascended the papal
throne, and sought amid troubles at home and abroad to exalt to
its utmost pitch the hierarchical idea. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1832 he issued an
encyclical, in which he declared irreconcilable war against modern
science as well as against freedom of conscience and the press, and
his whole pontificate was a consistent carrying out of this principle.
He encountered incessant opposition from liberal and revolutionary
movements in his own territory, restrained only by Austrian and
French military interference, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1832-1838, and from the rejection
of his hierarchical schemes by Spain, Portugal, Prussia, and Russia.<note place='foot'>Wiseman, <q>Recollections of the Last Four Popes.</q> 3 vols.
London, 1853. Mendham, <q>Index of Prohibited Books by order of
Gregory XVI.</q> London, 1840.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_185_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Pius IX., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1846-1878.</emph>&mdash;Count Mastai Feretti in his fifty-fourth
year succeeded Gregory on 16th June, and took the name of Pius IX.
While in ecclesiastical matters he seemed willing to hold by the old
paths and distinctly declared against Bible societies, he favoured
reform in civil administration and encouraged the hopes of the liberals
who longed for the independence and unity of Italy. But this only
awakened the thunder storm which soon burst upon his own head.
The far resounding cry of the jubilee days, <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Evviva Pio Nono!</foreign></q>
ended in the pope's flight to Gaeta in November, 1848; and in
February, 1849, the Roman Republic was proclaimed. The French
Republic, however, owing to the threatening attitude of Austria,
hastened to take Rome and restore the temporal power of the pope.
Amid the convulsions of Italy, Pius could not return to Rome till
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
April, 1850, where he was maintained by French and Austrian
bayonets. Abandoning his liberal views, the pope now put himself
more and more under the influence of the Jesuits, and his absolutist
and reactionary politics were directed by Card. Antonelli. From his
exile at Gaeta he had asked the opinion of the bishops of the whole
church regarding the immaculate conception of the blessed Virgin, to
whose protection he believed that he owed his safety. The opinions of
576 were favourable, resting on Bible proofs: Genesis iii. 15, Song of Sol.
iv. 7, 12, and Luke i. 28; but some French and German bishops were
strongly opposed. The question was now submitted for further consideration
to various congregations, and finally the consenting bishops
were invited to Rome to settle the terms of the doctrinal definition of
the new dogma. After four secret sessions it was acknowledged by
acclamation, and on 8th December, 1854 (§ 104, 7), the pope read in
the Sixtine chapel the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ineffabilis</foreign> and placed a brilliant diadem
on the head of the image of the queen of heaven. The disciples of St.
Thomas listened in silence to this aspersion of their master's orthodoxy;
no heed was paid to two isolated individual voices that protested; the
bishops of all Catholic lands proclaimed the new dogma, the theologians
vindicated it, and the spectacle-loving people rejoiced in the
pompous Mary-festival. The pope's next great performance was the
encyclical, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quanta cura</foreign>, of December 8th, 1864, and the accompanying
syllabus cataloguing in eighty-four propositions all the errors of the
day, by which not only the antichristian and anti-ecclesiastical
tendencies, but also claims for freedom of belief and worship, liberty
of the press and science, the state's independence of the church, the
equality of the laity and clergy in civil matters, in short all the principles
of modern political and social life, were condemned as heretical.
Three years later the centenary of Peter (§ 16, 1) brought five hundred
bishops to Rome, with other clergy and laymen from all lands. The
enthusiasm for the papal chair was such that the pope was encouraged
to convoke an œcumenical council. The jubilee of his consecration
as priest in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1869 brought him congratulatory addresses signed
by one and a half millions, filled the papal coffers, attracted an
immense number of visitors to Rome, and secured to all the votaries
gathered there a complete indulgence. On the Vatican Council which
met during that same year, see <ref target='Section_189'>§ 189</ref>.<note place='foot'>Legge, <q>Pius IX. to the Restoration of 1850.</q> 2 vols. London,
1872. Trollope, <q>Life of Pius IX.</q> 2 vols. London, 1877. Shea,
<q>Life and Pontificate of Pius IX.</q> New York, 1877.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_185_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Overthrow of the Papal States.</emph>&mdash;In the Peace of Villafranca
of 1859, which put an end to the short Austro-French war in Italy,
a confederation was arranged of all the Italian princes under the
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
honorary presidency of the pope for drawing up the future constitution
of Italy. During the war the Austrians had vacated Bologna,
but the French remained in Rome to protect the pope. The revolution
now broke out in Romagna. Victor Emanuel, king of Sardinia, was
proclaimed dictator for the time over that part of the Papal States and
a provisional government was set up. In vain did the pope remind
Christendom in an encyclical of the necessity of maintaining his
temporal power, in vain did he thunder his <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>excommunicatio major</foreign>
against all who would contribute to its overthrow. A pamphlet war
against the temporal power now began, and About's letters in the
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Moniteur</foreign> described with bitter scorn the incapacity of the papal
government. In his pamphlet, <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Le Pope et le Congrès</foreign>,</q> Laguéronnière
proposed to restrict the pope's sovereignty to Rome and its
neighbourhood, levy a tax for the support of the papal court on all
Catholic nations, and leave Rome undisturbed by political troubles.
On December 31st, 1859, Napoleon III. exhorted the pope to yield to
the logic of facts and to surrender the provinces that refused any
longer to be his. The pope then issued a rescript in which he declared
that he could never give up what belonged not to him but to
the church. The popular vote in Romagna went almost unanimously
for annexation to Sardinia, and this, in spite of the papal ban, was
done. A revolution broke out in Umbria and the March of Ancona,
and Victor Emanuel without more ado attached these states also to
his dominion in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860, so that only Rome and the Campagna were
retained by the pope, and even these only by means of French support.
At the September convention of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1864 Italy undertook to maintain
the papal domain intact, to permit the organization of an independent
papal army, and to contribute to the papal treasury; while France
was to quit Roman territory within at the latest two years. The
pope submitted to what he could not prevent, but still insisted upon
his most extreme claims, answered every attempt at conciliation with
his stereotyped <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non possumus</foreign>, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1866 proclaimed St. Catherine
of Siena (§ 112, 4) patron of the <q>city.</q> When the last of the French
troops took ship in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1866 the radical party thought the time had
come for freeing Italy from papal rule, and roused the whole land by
public proclamation. Garibaldi again put himself at the head of the
movement. The Papal State was soon encircled by bands of volunteers,
and insurrections broke out even within Rome itself. Napoleon pronounced
this a breach of the September convention, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1867
the volunteers were utterly routed by the French at Mentana. The
French guarded Civita Vecchia and fortified Rome. But in August,
1870, their own national exigencies demanded the withdrawal of the
French troops, and after the battle of Sedan the Italians to a man
insisted on having Rome as their capital, and Victor Emanuel acquiesced.
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
The pope sought help far and near from Catholic and
non-Catholic powers, but he received only the echo of his own words,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non possumus</foreign>. After a four hours' cannonade a breach was made in
the walls of the eternal city, the white flag appeared on St. Angelo,
and amid the shouts of the populace the Italian troops entered on
September 20th, 1870. A plebiscite in the papal dominions gave
133,681 votes in favour of annexation and 1,507 against; in Rome
alone there were 40,785 for and only 46 against. The king now issued
the decree of incorporation; Rome became capital of united Italy and
the Quirinal the royal residence.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_185_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Prisoner of the Vatican, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870-1878.</emph>&mdash;The dethroned papal
king could only protest and utter denunciations. No result followed
from the adoption of St. Joseph as guardian and patron of the church,
nor from the solemn consecration of the whole world to the most
sacred heart of Jesus, at the jubilee of June 16th, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1875. The
measures of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871, by which Cavour sought to realize his ideal of
a <q>free church in a free state,</q> were pronounced absurd, cunning,
deceitful, and an outrage on the apostles Peter and Paul. By these
measures the rights and privileges of a sovereign for all time had been
conferred on the pope: the holiness and inviolability of his person,
a body-guard, a post and telegraph bureau, free ambassadorial communication
with foreign powers, the <emph>ex-territoriality</emph> of his palace of
the Vatican, embracing fifteen large saloons, 11,500 rooms, 236 stairs,
218 corridors, two chapels, several museums, archives, libraries, large
beautiful gardens, etc., as also of the Lateran and the summer palace
of Castle Gandolpho, with all appurtenances, also an annual income,
free from all burdens and taxes, of three and a quarter million francs,
equal to the former amount of his revenue, together with unrestricted
liberty in the exercise of all ecclesiastical rights of sovereignty and
primacy, and the renunciation of all state interference in the disposal
of bishoprics and benefices. The right of the inferior clergy to
exercise the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>appellatio ab abusu</foreign> to a civil tribunal was set aside, and
of all civil rights only that of the royal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>exequatur</foreign> in the election of
bishops, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the mere right of investing the nominee of the curia in
the possession of the revenues of his office, was retained.&mdash;To the end
of his life Pius every year returned the dotation as an insult and
injury, and <q>the starving holy father in prison, who has not where to
lay his head,</q> received three or four times more in Peter's pence contributed
by all Catholic Christendom. Playing the <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> of a prisoner
he never passed beyond the precincts of the Vatican. He reached the
semi-jubilee of his papal coronation in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871, being the first pope
who falsified the old saying, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Annos Petri non videbit</foreign>. He rejected the
offer of a golden throne and the title of <q>the great,</q> but he accepted a
Parisian lady's gift of a golden crown of thorns. In support of the
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
prison myth, straws from the papal cell were sold in Belgium for half
a franc per stalk, and for the same price photographs of the pope
behind an iron grating. As once on a time the legend arose about the
disciple whom Jesus loved that he would not die, so was it once said
about the pope; and on his eighty-third birthday, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1874, a Roman
Jesuit paper, eulogising the moral purity of his life, put the words
in his mouth, <q>Which of you convinceth me of sin?</q> But he himself
by constantly renewed rescripts, encyclicals, briefs, allocutions to the
cardinals and to numerous deputations from far and near, unweariedly
fanned the flame of enthusiasm and fanaticism throughout papal
Christendom, and thundered threatening prophecies not only against
the Italian, but also against foreign states, for with most of them he
lived in open war. A collection of his <q>Speeches delivered at the
Vatican</q> was published in 1874, commented on by Gladstone in
the <emph>Contemporary Review</emph> for January, 1875, who gives abundant
quotations showing papal assumptions, maledictions, abuse and misunderstanding
of the Scriptures with which they abound. On the
fiftieth anniversary of the pope's episcopal consecration, in June,
1877, crowds from all lands assembled to offer their congratulations,
with costly presents and Peter's pence amounting to sixteen and
a half million francs. He died February 8th, 1878, in the eighty-sixth
year of his age and thirty-second of his pontificate. His
heirs claimed the unpaid dotations of twenty million lire, but were
refused by the courts of law.<note place='foot'>Geffcken, <q>Church and State,</q> vol. ii., pp. 269-293: <q>The Italian
Question and the Papal States.</q></note>&mdash;His secretary Antonelli, descended
from an old brigand family, who from the time of his stay at Gaeta
was his evil demon, predeceased him in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1876. Though the son of
a poor herdsman and woodcutter, he left more than a hundred million
lire. His natural daughter, to the great annoyance of the Vatican,
sought, but without success, in the courts of justice to make good her
claims against her father's greedy brothers.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_185_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Leo XIII.</emph>&mdash;After only two days' conclave the Cardinal-archbishop
of Perugia, Joachim Pecci, born in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1810, was proclaimed on
February 20th, 1878, as Leo XIII. In autograph letters he intimated
his accession to the German and Russian emperors, but not to the
king of Italy, and expressed his wish for a good mutual understanding.
To the government of the Swiss Cantons he declared his hope
that their ancient friendly relations might be restored. At Easter,
1878, he issued an encyclical to all patriarchs, primates, archbishops,
and bishops, in which he required of them that they should earnestly
entreat the mediation of the <q>immaculate queen of heaven</q> and the
intercession of St. Joseph, <q>the heavenly shield of the church,</q> and
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
also failed not to make prominent the infallibility of the apostolic
chair, and to condemn all the errors condemned by his predecessors,
emphasizing the necessity of restoring the temporal power of the pope,
and confirming and renewing all the protests of his predecessor Pius
IX., of sacred memory, against the overthrow of the Papal States.
On the first anniversary of his elevation he proclaimed a universal
jubilee, with the promise of a complete indulgence. He still persisted
in the prison myth of his predecessor, and like him sent back the
profferred contribution of his <q>jailor.</q> In the conflicts with foreign
powers inherited from Pius, as well as in his own, he has employed
generally moderate and conciliatory language.&mdash;He has not hesitated
to take the first step toward a good understanding with his opponents,
for which, while persistently maintaining the ancient principles of
the papal chair, he makes certain concessions in regard to subordinate
matters, always with the design and expectation of seeing
them outweighed on the other side by the conservation of all the
other hierarchical pretensions of the curial system. It was, however,
only in the middle of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1885 that it became evident that the pope
had determined, without allowing any misunderstanding to arise
between himself and his cardinals, to break through the trammels
of the irreconcilable zealots in the college. And indeed after the
conclusion of the German <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign> (§ 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_13'>13</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_15'>15</ref>), brought about
by these means, in an allocution with reference thereto addressed to
the cardinals in May, 1887, he gave an unexpected expression to his
wish and longing in regard to an understanding with the government
on the Italian question, which involved an utter renunciation of his
predecessor's dogged <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non possumus</foreign>, the attitude hitherto unfalteringly
maintained. <q>Would that peaceful counsels,</q> says he, <q>embracing all
our peoples should prevail in Italy also, and that at last once that
unhappy difference might be overcome without loss of privilege to the
holy see!</q> Such harmony, indeed, is only possible when the pope <q>is
subjected to no authority and enjoys perfect freedom,</q> which would
cause no loss to Italy, <q>but would only secure its lasting peace and
safety.</q> That he counts upon the good offices of the German emperor
for the effecting of this longed-for restoration of such a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>modus vivendi</foreign>
with the Italian government, he has clearly indicated in his preliminary
communications to the Prussian centre exhorting to peace
(<ref target='Section_197_Para_14'>§ 197, 14</ref>). The <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Moniteur de Rome</foreign> (<ref target='Section_188_Para_1'>§ 188, 1</ref>), however, interpreted
the words of the pope thus: <q>Italy would lose nothing materially or
politically, if it gave a small corner of its territory to the pope, where
he might enjoy actual sovereignty as a guarantee of his spiritual
independence.</q>&mdash;On Leo's contributions to theological science see
<ref target='Section_191_Para_12'>§ 191, 12</ref>; on his attitude to Protestantism and the Eastern Church,
see § 175, <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_175_Para_4'>4</ref>. He expressed himself against the freemasons in an
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
encyclical of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1884 with even greater severity than Pius. Consequently
the Roman Inquisition issued an instruction to all bishops
throughout the Catholic world requiring them to enjoin their clergy
in the pulpit and the confessional to make it known that all freemasons
are <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>eo ipso</foreign> excommunicated, and by Catholic associations of
every sort, especially by the spread of the third order of St. Francis
(<ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>§ 186, 2</ref>), the injunction was carried out. At the same time a year's
reprieve was given to the freemasons, during which the Roman
heresy laws, which required their children, wives, and relatives to
denounce them to all clergy and laymen, were to be suspended.
Should the guilty, however, allow this day of grace to pass, these
laws were to be again fully enforced, and then it would be only for
the pope to absolve them from their terrible sin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_186'/>
<head>§ 186. Various Orders and Associations.</head>

<p>
The order of the Jesuits restored in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814 by Pius
VII. impregnated all other orders with its spirit, gained commanding
influence over Pius IX., made the bishops its
agents, and turned the whole Catholic church into a Jesuit
institution. An immense number of societies arose aiming
at the accomplishment of home mission work, inspired by
the Jesuit spirit and carrying out unquestioningly the
ultramontane ideas of their leaders. Also zeal for foreign
missions on old Jesuit lines revived, and the enthusiasm for
martyrdom was due mainly to the same cause.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_186_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Society of Jesus and Related Orders.</emph>&mdash;After the suppression of
their order by Clement XIV. the Jesuits found refuge mainly among
the <emph>Redemptorists</emph> (<ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>§ 165, 2</ref>), whose headquarters were at Vienna, from
which they spread through Austria and Bavaria, finding entrance
also into Switzerland, France, Belgium, and Holland, and after 1848
into Catholic Prussia, as well as into Hesse and Nassau. The <emph>Congregation
of the Sacred Heart</emph> was founded by ex-Jesuits in Belgium in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1794, and soon spread in Austria and Bavaria.&mdash;The <emph>restored
Jesuit order</emph> was met with a storm of opposition from the liberals.
The July revolution of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830 drove the Jesuits from France, and
when they sought to re-establish themselves, Gregory XVI., under
pressure of the government, insisted that their general should abolish
the French institutions in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1845. An important branch of the
order had settled in Catholic Switzerland, but the unfavourable issue
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
of the Separated Cantons' War of 1847 drove its members out of that
refuge. The revolution of 1848 threatened the order with extinction,
but the papal restoration of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1850 re-introduced it into most
Catholic countries. Since then the sons of Loyola have renewed their
youth like the eagle. They have forced their way into all lands,
even in those on both sides of the ocean that had by legislative enactments
been closed against them, spreading ultramontane views among
Catholics, converting Protestants, and disseminating their principles
in schools and colleges. Even Pius IX., under whose auspices Aug.
Theiner had been allowed, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1853, in his <q>History of the Pontificate
of Clement XIV.</q> to bring against them the heavy artillery
drawn from <q>the secret archives of the Vatican,</q> again handed over
to them the management of public instruction, and surrendered himself
even more and more to their influence, so that at last he saw only
by their eyes, heard only with their ears, and resolved only according
to their will.<note place='foot'>Geffcken, <q>Church and State,</q> vol. ii., pp. 236-238.</note> The founding of the Italian kingdom under the Prince
of Sardinia in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860 led to their expulsion from all Italy, with
the exception of Venice and the remnants of the Papal States.
When, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1866, Venice also became an Italian province, they
migrated thence into the Tyrol and other Austrian provinces, where
they enjoyed the blessings of the concordat (<ref target='Section_198_Para_2'>§ 198, 2</ref>). Spain, too, on
the expulsion of Queen Isabella in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868, and even Mexico and
several of the States of Central and Southern America, drove out the
disciples of Loyola. On the other hand, they made brilliant progress
in Germany, especially in Rhenish Hesse and the Catholic provinces
of Prussia. But under the new German empire the Reichstag, in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1872, passed a law suppressing the Jesuits and all similar orders
throughout the empire (<ref target='Section_197_Para_4'>§ 197, 4</ref>). They were also formally expelled
from France in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1880 (<ref target='Section_203_Para_6'>§ 203, 6</ref>). Still, however, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1881 the
order numbered 11,000 members in five provinces, and according to
Bismarck's calculation in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1872 their property amounted to 280
million thalers. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1853 John Beckx of Belgium was made
general. He retired in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1881 at the age of ninety, Anderlady,
a Swiss, having been appointed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1883 his colleague and successor.&mdash;The
hope which was at first widely entertained that Leo
XIII. would emancipate himself from the domination of the order
seems more and more to be proved a vain delusion. In July, 1886,
he issued, on the occasion of a new edition of the institutions of the
order, a letter to Anderlady, in which he, in the most extravagant
manner, speaks of the order as having performed the most signal
services <q>to the church and society,</q> and confirms anew everything
that his predecessors had said and done in its favour, while expressly
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
and formally he recalls anew anything that any of them had said
and done against it.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_186_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Other Orders and Congregations.</emph>&mdash;After the storms of the revolution
religious orders rapidly recovered lost ground. France decreed,
on November 2nd, 1789, the abolition of all orders, and cloisters and
in 1802, under Napoleon's auspices, they were also suppressed in the
German empire and the friendly princes indemnified with their
goods. Yet on grounds of utility Napoleon restored the Lazarists,
as well as the Sisters of Mercy, whose scattered remnants he collected
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1807 in Paris into a general chapter, under the presidency
of the empress-mother. But new cloisters in great numbers were
erected specially in Belgium and France (in opposition to the law
of 1789, which was unrepealed), in Austria, Bavaria, Prussia, Rhenish
Hesse, etc., as also in England and America. In 1849 there were
in Prussia fifty monastic institutes; in 1872 there were 967. In
Cologne one in every 215, in Aachen one in every 110, in Münster
one in every sixty-one, in Paderborn one in every thirty-three, was a
Catholic priest or member of an order. In Bavaria, between 1831 and
1873 the number of cloisters rose from 43 to 628, all, with the exception
of some old Benedictine monasteries, inspired and dominated by the
Jesuits. Even the Dominicans, originally such determined opponents,
are now pervaded by the Jesuit spirit. The restoration of the
<emph>Trappist order</emph> (<ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>§ 156, 8</ref>) deserves special mention. On their expulsion
from La Trappe in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1791 the brothers found an asylum in the
Canton Freiburg, and when driven thence by the French invasion of
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1798, Paul I. obtained from the czar permission for them to settle
in White Russia, Poland, and Lithuania. But expelled from these
regions again in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1800 they wandered through Europe and
America, till after Napoleon's defeat they purchased back the monastery
of La Trappe, and made it the centre of a group of new settlements
throughout France and beyond it.&mdash;Besides regular orders there were
also numerous <emph>congregations</emph> or religious societies with communal life
according to a definite but not perpetually binding rule, and without
the obligation of seclusion, as well as <emph>brotherhoods</emph> and <emph>sisterhoods</emph>
without any such rule, which after the restoration of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814 in
France and after <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848 in Germany, were formed for the purposes
of prayer, charity, education, and such like. From France many of
these spread into the Rhine Provinces and Westphalia.&mdash;In Spain and
Portugal (§ 205, <ref target='Section_205_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_205_Para_5'>5</ref>) all orders were repeatedly abolished, subsequently
also in Sardinia and even in all Italy (§ 204, <ref target='Section_204_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_204_Para_2'>2</ref>), and also in several
Romish American states (§ 209, <ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_209_Para_2'>2</ref>), as also in Prussia and Hesse
(§ 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_8'>8</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_15'>15</ref>). Finally the third French Republic has enforced existing
laws against all orders and congregations not authorized by the State
(§ 206, 6).&mdash;On the 700th anniversary of the birth of St. Francis, in
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
September, 1882, Leo XIII. issued an encyclical declaring the institute
of the Franciscan Tertiaries (§ 98, 11) alone capable of saving human
society from all the political and social dangers of the present and
future, which had some success at least in Italy.
</p>

<p>
Of what inhuman barbarity the superiors of cloisters are still capable
is shown <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>instar omnium</foreign> in the horrible treatment of the nun
<emph>Barbara Ubryk</emph>, who, avowedly on account of a breach of her vow of
chastity, was confined since <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848 in the cloister of the Carmelite
nuns at Cracow in a dark, narrow cell beside the sewer of the convent,
without fire, bed, chair, or table. It was only in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1869, in consequence
of an anonymous communication to the law officers, that
she was freed from her prison in a semi-animal condition, quite
naked, starved, and covered with filth, and consigned to an asylum.
The populace of Cracow, infuriated at such conduct, could be restrained
from demolishing all the cloisters only by the aid of the military.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_186_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Pius Verein.</emph>&mdash;A society under the name of the Pius Verein
was started at Mainz in October, 1848, to further Catholic interests,
advocating the church's independence of the State, the right of the
clergy to direct education, etc. At the annual meetings its leading
members boasted in grossly exaggerated terms of what had been
accomplished and recklessly prophesied of what would yet be
achieved. At the twenty-eighth general assembly at Bonn in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1881, with an attendance of 1,100, the same confident tone was maintained.
Windhorst reminded the Prussian government of the
purchase of the Sibylline books, and declared that each case of
breaking off negotiations raised the price of the peace. Not a tittle
of the ultramontane claims would be surrendered. The watchword
is the complete restoration of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>status quo ante</foreign>. Baron von Loë,
president of the Canisius Verein, concluded his triumphant speech
with the summons to raise the membership of the union from 80,000
to 800,000, yea to 8,000,000; then would the time be near when
Germany should become again a Catholic land and the church again
the leader of the people. At the assembly at Düsseldorf in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1883,
Windhorst declared, amid the enthusiastic applause of all present,
that after the absolute abrogation of the May laws the centre would
not rest till education was again committed unreservedly to the
church. In the assembly at Münster in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1885, he extolled the
pope (notwithstanding all confiscation and imprisoning for the time
being) as the governor and lord of the whole world. The thirty-third
assembly at Breslau in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1886, with special emphasis,
demanded the recall of all orders, including that of the Jesuits.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_186_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The various German unions</emph> gradually fell under ultramontane
influences. The Borromeo Society circulated Catholic books inculcating
ultramontane views in politics and religion. The Boniface
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
Union, founded by Martin, Bishop of Paderborn, aided needy Catholic
congregations in Protestant districts. Other unions were devoted to
foreign missions, to work among Germans in foreign lands, etc. In
all the universities such societies were formed. In Bavaria patriot
peasant associations were set on foot, as a standing army in the conflict
of the ultramontane hierarchy with the new German empire.
For the same purpose Bishop Ketteler founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871 the Mainz
Catholic Union, which in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814 had 90,000 members. The Görres
Society of 1876 (<ref target='Section_188_Para_1'>§ 188, 1</ref>) and the Canisius Society of 1879 (§ 151, 1)
were meant to promote education on ultramontane lines.&mdash;In <emph>Italy</emph>
such societies have striven for the restoration of the temporal power
and the supremacy of the church over the State. The unions of
<emph>France</emph> were confederated in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870, and this general association
holds an annual congress. The several unions were called <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>œuvres</foreign>.</q>
The <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Œuvre du Vœu National</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, had the task of restoring penitent
France to the <q>sacred heart of Jesus</q> (<ref target='Section_188_Para_12'>§ 188, 12</ref>); the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Œuvre Pontifical</foreign>
made collections of Peter's pence and for persecuted priests; the
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Œuvre de Jesus-Ouvrier</foreign> had to do with the working classes, etc.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_186_Para_5'/>
5. The knowledge of the omnipotence of <emph>capital</emph> in these days led
to various proposals for turning it to account in the interests of
Catholicism. The Catholic Bank schemes of the Belgian Langrand-Dumonceau
in 1872 and the Munich bank were pure swindles; and
that of Adele Spitzeder 1869-1872, pronounced <q>holy</q> by the clergy
and ultramontane press, collapsed with a deficit of eight and a quarter
million florins.&mdash;Archbishop Purcell of Cincinnati invited church
members to avoid risk to bank with him. He invested in land,
advanced money for building churches, cloisters, schools, etc., and in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1878 found himself bankrupt with liabilities amounting to five
million dollars. He then offered to resign his office, but the pope
refused and gave him a coadjutor, whereupon the archbishop retired
into a cloister where he died in his eighty-third year. In the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Union
Générale</foreign> of Paris, founded in 1876, which came to a crash in 1882, the
French aristocracy, the higher clergy and members of orders lost
hundreds of millions of francs.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_186_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The Catholic Missions.</emph>&mdash;The impulse given to Catholic interests
after 1848 was seen in the zeal with which missions in Catholic lands,
like the Protestant Methodist revival and camp-meetings (<ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>§ 208, 1</ref>),
began to be prosecuted. An attempt was thus made to gather in the
masses, who had been estranged from the church during the storms
of the revolution. The Jesuits and Redemptorists were prominent in
this work. In bands of six they visited stations, staying for three
weeks, hearing confessions, addressing meetings three times a day,
and concluding by a general communion.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_186_Para_7'/>
7. Besides the Propaganda (<ref target='Section_156_Para_9'>§ 156, 9</ref>), fourteen societies in Rome,
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
three in Paris, thirty in the whole of Catholic Christendom, are
devoted to the dissemination of Catholicism among <emph>Heretics</emph> and
<emph>Heathens</emph>. The Lyons Association for the spread of the faith, instituted
in 1822, has a revenue of from four to six million francs.
Specially famous is the <emph>Picpus Society</emph>, so called from the street in
Paris where it has its headquarters. Its founder was the deacon
Coudrin, a pupil of the seminary for priests at Poictiers broken up in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1789. Amid the evils done to the church and the priests by the
Revolution, in his hiding-place he heard a divine call to found a
society for the purpose of training the youth in Catholic principles,
educating priests, and bringing the gospel to the heathen <q>by atoning
for excesses, crimes, and sins of all kinds by an unceasing day and
night devotion of the most holy sacrament of the altar.</q> Such a
society he actually founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1805, and Pius VII. confirmed it
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1817. The founder died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1837, after his society had
spread over all the five continents. Its chief aim henceforth was
missions to the heathen. While the Picpus society, as well as the
other seminaries and monkish orders, sent forth crowds of missionaries,
other societies devoted themselves to collecting money and
engaging in prayer. The most important of these is the <emph>Lyonese
Society</emph> for the spread of the faith of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1822. The member's weekly
contribution is 5 cents, the daily prayer-demand a paternoster, an
angel greeting, and a <q>St. Francis Xavier, pray for us.</q> The
fanatical journal of the society had a yearly circulation of almost
250,000 copies, in ten European languages. The popes had showered
upon its members rich indulgences.&mdash;After Protestant missions had
received such a powerful impulse in the nineteenth century, the
Catholic societies were thereby impelled to force in wherever success
had been won and seemed likely to be secured, and wrought with all
conceivable jesuitical arts and devices, for the most part under the
political protection of France. The Catholic missions have been most
zealously and successfully prosecuted in North America, China, India,
Japan, and among the schismatic churches of the Levant. Since 1837
they have been advanced by aid of the French navy in the South Seas
(<ref target='Section_184_Para_7'>§ 184, 7</ref>) and in North Africa by the French occupation of Algiers,
and most recently in Madagascar. In South Africa they have made
no progress.&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1837-1839 a bloody persecution raged in Tonquin
and Cochin China; in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1866 Christianity was rooted out of Corea,
and over 2,000 Christians slain; two years later persecution was
renewed in Japan. In China, through the oppressions of the French,
the people rose against the Catholics resident there. This movement
reached a climax in the rebellion of 1870 at Tientsin, when all French
officials, missionaries, and sisters of mercy were put to death, and the
French consulate, Catholic churches and mission houses were levelled
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
to the ground. Also in Further India since the French war of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1883 with Tonquin, over which China claimed rights of suzerainty,
the Catholic missions have again suffered, and many missionaries
have been martyred.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 187. Liberal Catholic Movements.</head>

<p>
Alongside of the steady growth of ultramontanism from
the time of the restoration of the papacy in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1814, there
arose also a reactionary movement, partly of a mystical-irenical,
evangelical-revival and liberal-scientific, and partly
of a radical-liberalistic, character. But all the leaders in
such movements sooner or later succumbed before the
strictly administered discipline of the hierarchy. The Old
Catholic reaction (<ref target='Section_190'>§ 190</ref>), on the other hand, in spite of
various disadvantages, still maintains a vigorous existence.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_187_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Mystical-Irenical Tendencies.</emph>&mdash;<emph>J. M. Sailer</emph>, deprived in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1794 of
his office at Dillingen (<ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>§ 165, 12</ref>), was appointed in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1799 professor
of moral and pastoral theology at Ingolstadt, and was transferred to
Landshut in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1800. There for twenty years his mild and conciliatory
as well as profoundly pious mysticism powerfully influenced
crowds of students from South Germany and Switzerland. Though
the pope refused to confirm his nomination by Maximilian as Bishop
of Augsburg in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1820, he so far cleared himself of the suspicion
of mysticism, separatism, and crypto-calvinism, that in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1829 no
opposition was made to his appointment as Bishop of Regensburg.
Sailer continued faithful to the Catholic dogmatic, and none of his
numerous writings have been put in the Index. Yet he lay under
suspicion till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1832, and this seemed to be justified
by the intercourse which he and his disciples had with Protestant
pietists. His likeminded scholar, friend, and vicar-general, the Suffragan-bishop
<emph>Wittmann</emph>, was designated his successor in Regensburg,
but he died before receiving papal confirmation. Of all his pupils
the most distinguished was the Westphalian Baron von <emph>Diepenbrock</emph>,
over whose wild, intractable, youthful nature Sailer exercised a magic
influence. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1823 he was ordained priest, became Sailer's secretary,
remaining his confidential companion till his death, was made
vicar-general to Sailer's successor in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1842, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1845 was
raised to the archiepiscopal chair of Breslau, where he joined the
ultramontanes, and entered with all his heart into the ecclesiastico-political
conflicts of the Würzburg episcopal congress (<ref target='Section_192_Para_4'>§ 192, 4</ref>).
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
His services were rewarded by a cardinal's hat from Pius IX. in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1850. His pastoral letters, however, as well as his sermons and private
correspondence, show that he never altogether forgot the teaching of
his spiritual father. He delighted in the study of the mediæval
mystics, and was specially drawn to the writings of Suso.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_187_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Evangelical-Revival Tendencies.</emph>&mdash;A movement much more evangelical
than that of Sailer, having the doctrine of justification by
faith alone as its centre, was originated by a simple Bavarian priest,
<emph>Martin Boos</emph>, and soon embraced sixty priests in the diocese of Augsburg.
The spiritual experiences of Boos were similar to those of
Luther. The words of a poor old sick woman brought peace to his
soul in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1790, and led him to the study of Scripture. His preaching
among the people and his conversations with the surrounding
clergy produced a widespread revival. Amid manifold persecutions,
removed from one parish to another, and flying from Bavaria to
Austria and thence into Rhenish Prussia, where he died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1825
as priest of Sayn, he lighted wherever he went the torch of truth.
Even after his conversion Boos believed that he still maintained the
Catholic position, but was at last to his own astonishment convinced
of the contrary through intercourse with Protestant pietists and the
study of Luther's works. But so long as the mother church would
keep him he wished not to forsake her.<note place='foot'>Bridges, <q>Life of Martin Boos.</q> London, 1836.</note> So too felt his like-minded
companions <emph>Gossner</emph> and <emph>Lindl</emph>, who were expelled from Bavaria in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1829 and settled in St. Petersburg. Lindl, as Provost of South
Russia, went to reside in Odessa, where he exercised a powerful influence
over Catholics and Protestants and among the higher classes of
the Russians. The machinations of the Roman Catholic and Greek
churches caused both Gossner and Lindl to leave Russia in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1824.
They then joined the evangelical church, Lindl in Barmen and
Gossner in Berlin. Lindl drifted more and more into mystico-apocalyptic
fanaticism; but Gossner, from <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1829 till his death in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1858 as pastor of the Bohemian church in Berlin, proved a sincere
evangelical and a most successful worker.&mdash;The Bavarian priest Lutz
of Carlshuld, influenced by Boos, devoted himself to the temporal and
spiritual well-being of his people, preached Christ as the saviour of
sinners, and exhorted to diligent reading of the Bible. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1831,
with 600 of his congregation, he joined the Protestant church; but to
avoid separation from his beloved people, he returned again after ten
months, and most of his flock with him, still retaining his evangelical
convictions. He was not, however, restored to office, and subsequently
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1857, with three Catholic priests of the diocese, he attached
himself to the Irvingites, and was with them excommunicated.
</p>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_187_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Liberal-Scientific Tendencies.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Von Wessenberg</emph>, as vicar-general
of the diocese of Constance introduced such drastic administrative
reforms as proved most distasteful to the nuncio of Lucerne and the
Romish curia. He also endeavoured unsuccessfully to restore a
German national Catholic church. In the retirement of his later
years he wrote a history of the church synods of the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, which gave great offence to the ultramontanes.&mdash;<emph>Fr.
von Baader</emph> of Munich expressed himself so strongly against the
absolutism of the papal system that the ultramontane minister,
Von Abel, suspended his lectures on the philosophy of religion in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1838. He gave still greater offence by his work on Eastern and
Western Catholicism, in which he preferred the former to the latter.<note place='foot'>Hamberger, <q>Sketch of the Character of the Theosophy of
Baader,</q> translated in <emph>American Presbyterian and Theological Review</emph>,
1869.</note>
The talented <emph>Hirscher</emph> of Freiburg more interested in what is Christian
than what is Roman Catholic, could not be won over to yield
party service to the ultramontanes. They persecuted unrelentingly
<emph>Leop. Schmid</emph>, whose theosophical speculation had done so much to
restore the prestige of theology at Giessen, and had utterly discredited
their pretensions. When his enemies successfully opposed his consecration
as Bishop of Mainz in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1849, he resigned his professorship
and joined the philosophical faculty. Goaded on by the venomous
attacks of his opponents he advanced to a more extreme position, and
finally declared <q>that he was compelled to renounce the specifically
Roman Catholic church so long as she refused to acknowledge the
true worth of the gospel.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_187_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Radical-Liberalistic Tendencies.</emph>&mdash;The brothers <emph>Theiner</emph> of Breslau
wrote in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1828 against the celibacy of the clergy; but subsequently
John attached himself to the German-Catholics, and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1833
Augustine returned to his allegiance to Rome (<ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>§ 191, 7</ref>).&mdash;During the
July Revolution in Paris, the priest Lamennais, formerly a zealous
supporter of absolutism, became the enthusiastic apostle of liberalism.
His journal <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>L'Avenir</foreign>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830-1832, was the organ of the party, and
his <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Paroles d'un Croyant</foreign>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1834, denounced by the pope as unutterably
wicked, made an unprecedented sensation. The endeavour,
however, to unite elements thoroughly incongruous led to the gradual
breaking up of the school, and Lamennais himself approximated more
and more to the principles of modern socialism. He died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1854.
One of his most talented associates on the staff of the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Avenir</foreign> was the
celebrated pulpit orator <emph>Lacordaire</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1802-1861. Upon Gregory's
denunciation of the journal in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1832 Lacordaire submitted to Rome,
entered the Dominican order in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1840, and wrote a life of Dominic
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
in which he eulogised the Inquisition; but his eloquence still attracted
crowds to <foreign rend='italic'>Notre Dame</foreign>. Ultimately he fell completely under the
influence of the Jesuits.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_187_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Attempts at Reform in Church Government.</emph>&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1861 <emph>Liverani</emph>,
pope's chaplain and apostolic notary, exposed the scandalous mismanagement
of Antonelli, the corruption of the sacred college, the
demoralization of the Roman clergy, and the ambitious schemes of the
Jesuits, recommended the restoration of the holy Roman empire, not
indeed to the Germans, but to the Italians: the pope should confer
on the king of Italy by divine authority the title and privileges of
Roman emperor, who, on his part, should undertake as papal mandatory
the political administration of the States of the Church. But
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1873 he sought and obtained papal forgiveness for his errors.
The Jesuit <emph>Passaglia</emph> expressed enthusiastic approval of the movements
of Victor Emanuel and of Cavour's ideal of a <q>free church in
a free state.</q> He was expelled from his order, his book was put into
the Index, but the Italian Government appointed him professor of
moral philosophy in Turin. At last he retracted all that he had said
and written. In the preface to his popular exposition of the gospels
of 1874, the Jesuit father <emph>Curci</emph> urged the advisability of a reconciliation
between the Holy See and the Italian government, and expressed
his conviction that the Church States would never be restored. That
year he addressed the pope in similar terms, and refusing to retract,
was expelled his order in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1877. Leo XIII. by friendly measures
sought to move him to recant, but without success. The condemnation
of his books led to their wider circulation. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1883 he
charged the Holy See with the guilt of the unholy schism between
church and state; but in the following year he retracted whatever in
his writings the pope regarded as opposed to the faith, morals, and
discipline of the Catholic church.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_187_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Attempts to Found National Catholic Churches.</emph>&mdash;After the July
Revolution of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1830 the Abbé <emph>Chatel</emph> of Paris had himself consecrated
bishop of a new sect by a new-templar dignitary (<ref target='Section_210_Para_1'>§ 210, 1</ref>)
and became primate of the <emph>French Catholic Church</emph>, whose creed recognised
only the law of nature and viewed Christ as a mere man. After
various congregations had been formed, it was suppressed by the police
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1842. The Abbé <emph>Helsen</emph> of Brussels made a much more earnest
endeavour to lead the church of his fatherland from the antichrist
to the true Christ. His <emph>Apostolic Catholic Church</emph> was dissolved in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1857 and its remnants joined the Protestants. The founding of
the <emph>German Catholic Church</emph> in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1844 promised to be more enduring.
In August of that year, Arnoldi, Bishop of Treves, exhibited
the holy coat preserved there, and attracted one and a half millions of
pilgrims to Treves (<ref target='Section_188_Para_2'>§ 188, 2</ref>). A suspended priest, <emph>Ronge</emph>, in a letter
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
to the bishop denounced the worship of relics, seeking to pose as the
Luther of the nineteenth century. <emph>Czerski</emph> of Posen had in August,
1844, seceded from the Catholic church, and in October founded the
<q>Christian Catholic Apostolic Church,</q> whose creed embodied the
negations without the positive beliefs of the Protestant confessions,
maintaining in other respects the fundamental articles of the Christian
faith. Ronge meanwhile formed congregations in all parts of Germany,
excepting Bavaria and Austria. A General Assembly held at
Leipzig in March, 1845, brought to light the deplorable religious
nihilism of the leaders of the party. Czerski, who refused to abandon
the doctrine of Christ's divinity, withdrew from the conference, but
Ronge held a triumphal procession through Germany. His hollowness,
however, became so apparent that his adherents grew ashamed
of their enthusiasm for the new reformer. His congregations began
to break up; many withdrew, several of the leaders threw off the
mask of religion and adopted the <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> of political revolutionists.
After the settlement that followed the disturbances of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1848 the
remnants of this party disappeared.<note place='foot'>Laing, <q>Notes on the Rise, Progress, etc., of the German Catholic
Church of Ronge and Czerski.</q> London, 1845.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_187_Para_7'/>
7. The inferior clergy of Italy, after the political emancipation of
Naples from the Bourbon domination in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860, longed for deliverance
from clerical tyranny, and founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1862 a society
with the object of establishing a <emph>national Italian church</emph> independent
of the Romish curia. Four Neapolitan churches were put at the
disposal of the society by the minister Ricasoli, but in 1865, an agreement
having been come to between the curia and the government, the
bishops were recalled and the churches restored. Thousands, to save
themselves from starvation, gave in their submission, but a small
party still remained faithful. Encouraged by the events of 1870
(§§ 135, 3; <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>), they were able in 1875 to draw up a <q>dogmatic
statement</q> for the <q>Church of Italy independent of the Roman
hierarchy,</q> which indeed besides the Holy Scriptures admitted the
authority of the universal church as infallible custodian and interpreter
of revealed truth, but accepted only the first seven œcumenical
councils as binding. In the same year Bishop Turano of Girgenti
excommunicated five priests of the Silician town Grotta as opponents
of the syllabus and the dogma of infallibility. The whole clergy of
the town, numbering twenty-five, then renounced their obedience to
the bishop, and with the approval of the inhabitants declared themselves
in favour of the <q>statement.</q> North of Rome this movement
made little progress; but in 1875 three villages of the Mantuan
diocese claimed the ancient privilege of choosing their own priest,
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
and the bishop and other authorities were obliged to yield. The
Neapolitan movement, however, as a whole seems to be losing itself
in the sand.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_187_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>The Frenchman, Charles Loyson</emph>, known by his Carmelite monkish
name of <emph>Père Hyacinthe</emph>, was protected from the Jesuits by Archbishop
Darboy when he inveighed against the corruptions of the church, and
even Pius IX. on his visit to Rome in 1868 treated him with favour.
The general of his order having imposed silence on him, he publicly
announced his secession from the order and appeared as a <q>preacher
of the gospel,</q> claiming from a future General Council a sweeping
reform of the church, protesting against the falsifying of the gospel of
the Son of God by the Jesuits and the papal syllabus. He was then
excommunicated. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871 he joined the German Old Catholics
(<ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>§ 190, 1</ref>); and though he gave offence to them by his marriage, this did
not prevent the Old Catholics of Geneva from choosing him as their
pastor. But after ten months, because <q>he sought not the overthrow
but the reform of the Catholic church, and reprobated the despotism
of the mob as well as that of the clergy, the infallibility of the state
as well as that of the pope,</q> he withdrew and returned to Paris, where
he endeavoured to establish a French National Church free of Rome
and the Pope. The clerical minister Broglie, however, compelled
him to restrict himself to moral-religious lectures. In February,
1879, he built a chapel in which he preaches on Sundays and celebrates
mass in the French language. He sought alliance with the
Swiss Christian Catholics, whose bishop, Herzog, heartily reciprocated
his wishes, and with the Anglican church, which gave a friendly
response. But that this <q>seed corn</q> of a <q>Catholic Gallican Church</q>
will ever grow into a fully developed plant was from the very outset
rendered more than doubtful by the peculiar nature of the sower, as
well as of the seed and the soil.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_188'/>
<head>§ 188. Catholic Ultramontanism.</head>

<p>
The restoration of the Jesuit order led, during the long
pontificate of Pius IX., to the revival, and hitherto unapproached
prosperity of ultramontanism, especially in
France, whose bishops cast the Gallican Liberties overboard
(§§ <ref target='Section_156_Para_3'>156, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>203, 1</ref>), and in Germany, where with
strange infatuation even Protestant princes gave it all
manner of encouragement. Even the lower clergy were
trained from their youth in hierarchical ideas, and under
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
the despotic rule of their bishops, and a reign of terror
carried on by spies and secret courts, were constrained to
continue the profession of the strictest absolutism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Ultramontane Propaganda.</emph>&mdash;In <emph>France</emph> ultramontanism revived
with the restoration. Its first and ablest prophet was Count
<emph>de Maistre</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1754-1821, long Sardinian ambassador at St. Petersburg.
He wrote against the modern views of the relations of church and
state, supporting the infallibility, absolutism, and inviolability of
the pope. He was supported by Bonald, Chateaubriand, Lamartine,
Lamennais, Lacordaire, and Montalembert. Only Bonald maintained
this attitude. Between him and Chateaubriand a dispute arose over
the freedom of the press; Lamennais and Lacordaire began to blend
political radicalism with their ultramontanism; Lamartine involved
himself in the February revolution of 1848 as the apostle of humanity;
and Montalembert took up a half-way position. In 1840 Louis <emph>Veuillot</emph>
started the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Univers Religieux</foreign> in place of the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Avenir</foreign>, in which, till
his death in 1883, he vindicated the extremest ultramontanism.&mdash;In
<emph>Germany</emph> ultramontane views were disseminated by romancing historians
and poets mostly converts from Protestantism. <emph>Görres</emph>, professor
of history in Munich, represented the Reformation as a second
fall, and set forth the legends of ascetics in his <q>History of Mysticism</q>
as sound history. The German bishops set themselves to train the
clergy in hierarchical views, and by a rule of terror prevented any
departure from that theory. The ultramontanising of the masses
was carried on by missions, and by the establishment of brotherhoods
and sisterhoods. In the beginning of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1860 there were only
thirteen ultramontane journals with very few subscribers, while in
January, 1875, there were three hundred. The most important was
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Germania</foreign>, founded at Berlin in 1871.&mdash;The <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Civiltà Cattolica</foreign> of Rome
was always revised before publication by Pius IX., and under Leo
XIII. a similar position is held by the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Moniteur de Rome</foreign>, while the
<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Osservatore Romano</foreign> and the <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Voce della verità</foreign> have also an official
character.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Miracles.</emph>&mdash;Prince <emph>Hohenlohe</emph> went through many parts of Germany,
Austria, and Hungary, performing miraculous cures; but his
day of favour soon passed, and he settled down as a writer of ascetical
works.&mdash;Pilgrimages to wonder-working shrines were encouraged by
reports of cures wrought on the grand-niece of the Bishop of Cologne
(<ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>§ 193, 1</ref>), cured of knee-joint disease before the holy coat of Treves
(<ref target='Section_187_Para_6'>§ 187, 6</ref>). Subjected to examination, the pretended seamless coat
was found to be a bit of the gray woollen wrapping of a costly silk
Byzantine garment 1-½ feet broad and 1 foot long.
</p>

<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Stigmatizations.</emph>&mdash;In many cases these marks were found to have
been fraudulently made, but in other cases it was questionable
whether we had not here a pathological problem, or whether hysteria
created a desire to deceive or pre-disposed the subject to being duped
under clerical influence. <emph>Anna Cath. Emmerich</emph>, a nun of Dülmen in
Westphalia, in 1812, professed to have on her body bloody wound-marks
of the Saviour. For five years down to her death in 1824, the
poet Brentano sat at her feet, venerating her as a saint and listening
to her ecstatic revelations on the death and sufferings of the Redeemer
and his mother. Overberg, Sailer, and Von Stolberg were also satisfied
of the genuineness of her revelations and of the miraculous marking
of her body. The physician Von Drussel examined the wound-prints
and certified them as miraculous; but Bodde, professor of chemistry
at Münster, pronounced the blood marks spots produced by dragon's-blood.
Competent physicians declared her a hysterical woman incapable
of distinguishing between dream and reality, truth and lies,
honesty and deceit. Others famous in the same line were Maria von
Wörl, Dominica Lazzari, and <emph>Crescentia Stinklutsch</emph>; also Dorothea
Visser of Holland and Juliana Weiskircher from near Vienna.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_4'/>
4. Of a very doubtful kind were the miraculous marks on <emph>Louise
Lateau</emph>, daughter of a Belgian miner. On 24th April, 1868, it is said
she was marked with the print of the Saviour's wounds on hands, feet,
side, brow, and shoulders. In July, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1868, she fell into an ecstasy,
from which she could be awakened only by her bishop or one authorized
by him. Trustworthy physicians, after a careful medical examination,
reported that she laboured under a disease which they proposed
to call <q>stigmatic neuropathy.</q> Chemical analysis proved the
presence of food which had been regularly taken, probably in a somnambulistic
trance. In the summer of 1875 her sister for a time put
an end to the affair by refusing the clergy entrance into the house, and
she was then obliged to eat, drink, and sleep like other Christians, so
that the Friday bloody marks disappeared. But now, say ultramontane
journals, Louise became dangerously ill, and clergy were called
in to her help, and the marks were again visible. Her patron Bishop
Dumont of Tournay being deposed by the pope in 1879, she took part
against his successor, and was threatened with excommunication
(<ref target='Section_200_Para_7'>§ 200, 7</ref>). She was now deserted by the ultramontanes and Belgian
clergy, and treated as a poor, weak-minded invalid. She died neglected
and in obscurity in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1883.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_5'/>
5. Of pseudo-stigmatizations there has been no lack even in the
most recent times. In 1845 <emph>Caroline Beller</emph>, a girl of fifteen years, in
Westphalia, was examined by a skilful physician. On Thursday he
laid a linen cloth over the wound-prints, and sure enough on Friday
it was marked with blood stains; but also strips of paper laid under,
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
without her knowledge, were pricked with needles. The delinquent
now confessed her deceit, which she had been tempted to perpetrate
from reading the works of Francis of Assisi, Catherine of Siena, and
Emmerich. Theresa Städele in 1849, Rosa Tamisier in 1851, and
Angela Hupe in 1863, were convicted of fraudulently pretending to
have stigmata. The latter was proved to have feigned deafness and
lameness for a whole year, to have diligently read the writings of
Emmerich in 1861, to have shown the physician fresh bleeding wounds
on hands, feet, and side, and to have affirmed that she had neither
eaten nor drunk for a year. Four sisters of mercy were sent to attend
her, and they soon discovered the fraud. In 1876 the father confessor
of Ernestine Hauser was prosecuted for damages, having injured the
girl's health by the severe treatment to which she was subjected in
order to induce ecstasy and obtain an opportunity for impressing the
stigmata. <emph>Sabina Schäfer</emph> of Baden, in her eighteenth year, had for
two years borne the reputation of a wonder-working saint, who every
Friday showed the five wound prints, and in ecstasy told who were
in hell and who in purgatory. She professed to live without food,
though often she betook herself to the kitchen to pray alone, and even
carried food with her to give to her guardian angel to carry to the
distant poor. When under surveillance in 1880 she sought to bribe
her guardian to bring her meat and drink, fragments of food were
found among her clothes, and also a flask with blood and an instrument
for puncturing the skin. She confessed her guilt, and was
sentenced by the criminal court of Baden to ten weeks' imprisonment.
The ultramontane <emph>Pfälzer Bote</emph> complained that so-called liberals
should ruthlessly encroach on the rights of the church and the family.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Manifestations of the Mother of God in France.</emph>&mdash;The most celebrated
of these manifestations occurred in 1858 at <emph>Lourdes</emph>, where in
a grotto the Virgin repeatedly appeared to a peasant girl of fourteen
years, almost imbecile, named Bernadette Soubirous, saying <q>Je suis
l'Immaculée Conception,</q> and urging the erection of a chapel on that
spot. A miracle-working well sprang up there. Since 1872 the
pilgrimages under sanction of the hierarchy have been on a scale of
unexampled magnificence, and the cures in number and significance
far excelling anything heard of before.&mdash;At the village of <emph>La Salette</emph>
in the department of Isère, in 1846 two poor children, a boy of fifteen
and a girl of eleven years, saw a fair white-dressed lady sitting on a
stone and shedding tears, and, lo, from the spot where her foot rested
sprang up a well, at which innumerable cures have been wrought.
The epidemic of visions of the Virgin reached a climax in Alsace
Lorraine in 1872. In a wood near the village of <emph>Gereuth</emph> crowds of
women and children gathered, professing to see visions of the mother
of God; but when the police appeared to protect the forest, the
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
manifestation craze spread over the whole land, and at thirty-five
stations almost daily visions were enjoyed. The epidemic reached its
crisis in Mary's month, May, 1874, and continued with intervals down
to the end of the year. In some cases deceit was proved; but generally
it seemed to be the result of a diseased imagination and self-deception
fostered by speculative purveyors and the ultramontane press and
clergy.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Manifestations of the Mother of God in Germany.</emph>&mdash;In the summer
of 1876 three girls of eight years old in the village of <emph>Marpingen</emph>, in
the department of Treves, saw by a well a white-robed lady, with the
halo over her head and with a child in her arms, who made herself
known as the immaculate Virgin, and called for the erection of a
chapel. A voice from heaven said, This is my beloved Son, etc.
There were also processions and choirs of angels, etc. The devil, too,
appeared and ordered them to fall down and worship him. Thousands
crowded from far and near, and the water of the fountain wrought
miraculous cures. The surrounding clergy made a profitable business
of sending the water to America, and the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Germania</foreign> of Berlin
unweariedly sounded forth its praises. Before the court of justice
the children confessed the fraud, and were sentenced to the house of
correction; and though on technical grounds this judgment was set
aside, the supreme court of appeal in 1879 pronounced the whole thing
a scandalous and disgraceful swindle.&mdash;Weichsel, priest of <emph>Dittrichswald</emph>
in Ermland, who gained great reputation as an exorcist, made a
pilgrimage to Marpingen in the summer of 1877, and on his return
gave such an account of what he had seen to his communicants' class
that first one and then another saw the mother of God at a maple
tree, which also became a favourite resort for pilgrims.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>Canonizations.</emph>&mdash;When in 1825 Leo XII. canonized a Spanish
monk Julianus, who among other miracles had made roasted birds
fly away off the spit, the Roman wits remarked that they would
prefer a saint who would put birds on the spit for them. St. Liguori
was canonized by Gregory XVI. in 1839. Pius IX. canonized fifty-two
and beatified twenty-six of the martyrs of Japan. The Franciscans
had sought from Urban VIII. in 1627 canonization for six missionaries
and seventeen Japanese converts martyred in 1596 (§ 150, 2), but were
refused because they would not pay 52,000 Roman thalers for the
privilege. Pius IX. granted this, and included three Jesuit missionaries.
At Pentecost, 1862, the celebration took place, amid acclamations,
firing of cannons, and ringing of bells. In 1868 the infamous
president of the heretic tribunal Arbúes (§ 117, 2) received the distinction.
The number of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>doctores ecclesiæ</foreign> was increased by Pius IX.
by the addition of Hilary of Poitiers in 1851, Liguori in 1870, and
Francis de Sales in 1877. And Leo XIII. canonized four new saints,
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
the most distinguished of whom was the French mendicant, Bened.
Jos. Labre, who after having been dismissed by Carthusians, Cistercians,
and Trappists as unteachable, made a pilgrimage to Rome,
where he stayed fifteen years in abject poverty, and died in 1783 in
his thirty-sixth year.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>Discoveries of Relics.</emph>&mdash;The Roman catacombs continued still to
supply the demand for relics of the saints for newly erected altars.
Toward the end of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870 the Archbishop of St. Iago de Compostella
(§ 88, 4) made excavations in the crypt of his cathedral, in consequence
of an old tradition that the bones of the Apostle James the
Elder, the supposed founder of the church, had been deposited there,
and he succeeded in discovering a stone coffin with remains of a
skeleton. The report of this made to Pius IX. gave occasion to the
appointment of a commission of seven cardinals, who, after years of
minute examination of all confirmatory historical, archæological,
anatomical, and local questions, submitted their report to Leo XIII.,
whereupon, in November, 1884, he issued an <q>Apostolic Brief,</q> by
which he (without publishing the report) declared the unmistakable
genuineness of the discovered bones as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex constanti et pervulgato apud
omnes sermone jam ab Apostolorum ætate memoriæ prodita</foreign>, pronounced
the relics generally <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>perennes fontes</foreign>, from which the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dona cælestia</foreign> flow
forth like brooks among the Christian nations, and calls attention to
the fact that it is just in this century, in which the power of darkness
has risen up in conflict against the Lord and his Christ, these and
also many other relics <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>divinitus</foreign></q> have been discovered, as <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the
bones of St. Francis, of St. Clara, of Bishop Ambrose, of the martyrs
Gervasius and Protasius, of the Apostles Philip and James the Less,
the genuineness of which had been avouched by his predecessors Pius
VII. and Pius IX.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_10'/>
10. <emph>The blood of St. Januarius</emph>, a martyr of the age of Diocletian,
liquefies thrice a year for eight days, and on occasion of earthquakes
and such-like calamities in Naples, the blood is brought in two
vials by a matron near to the head of the saint; if it liquefies the
sign is favourable to the Neapolitans, if it remains thick unfavourable;
but in either case it forms a powerful means of agitation in
the hands of the clergy. Unbelievers venture to suggest that this
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>precioso sangue del taumaturgo S. Gennaro</foreign> is not blood, but a mixture
that becomes liquid by the warmth of the hand and the heat of the
air in the crowded room, some sort of cetaceous product coloured red.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_11'/>
11. About 100 clergy, twenty colour-bearers, 150 musicians, 10,000
leapers, 3,000 beggars, and 2,000 singers take part in the <emph>Leaping
Procession at Echternach</emph> in Luxemburg, which is celebrated yearly
on Whit-Tuesday. It was spoken of in the sixteenth century as an
ancient custom. After an <q>exciting</q> sermon, the procession is formed
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
in rows of from four to six persons bound together by pocket-handkerchiefs
held in their hands; Wilibrord's dance is played, and all jump
in time to the music, five steps forward and two backward, or two
backward and three forward, varied by three or four leaps to the
right and then as many to the left. Thus continually leaping the
procession goes through the streets of the city to the parish church,
up the sixty-two steps of the church stair and along the church aisles
to the tomb of Wilibrord (§ 78, 3). The dance is kept up incessantly
for two hours. The performers do so generally because of a vow, or
as penance for some fault, or to secure the saint's intercession for the
cure of epilepsy and convulsive fits, common in that region, mainly
no doubt owing to such senseless proceedings. The origin of the
custom is obscure. Tradition relates that soon after the death of
Wilibrord a disease appeared among the cattle which jumped incessantly
in the stalls, till the people went leaping in procession to
Wilibrord's tomb, and the plague was stayed! But the custom is
probably a Christian adaptation of an old spring festival dance of
pagan times (§ 75, 3; comp. 2 Sam. vi. 14).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_12'/>
12. <emph>The Devotion of the Sacred Heart.</emph>&mdash;Even after the suppression
of the Jesuit order the devotion of the Sacred Heart (<ref target='Section_156_Para_6'>§ 156, 6</ref>) was
zealously practised by the ex-Jesuits and their friends. On the
restoration of the order numerous brotherhoods and sisterhoods,
especially in France, devoted themselves to this exercise, and the
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>revanche</foreign> movement of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1870 used this as one of its most powerful
instruments. Crowds of pilgrims flocked to Paray le Monial, and
there, kneeling before the cradle of Bethlehem, they besought the
sacred heart of Jesus to save France and Rome, and the refrain of all
the pilgrim songs, <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Dieu, de la clemence ... sauvez Rome et la
France au nom du sacré-cœur</foreign>,</q> became the spiritual Marseillaise of
France returning to the Catholic fold. From the money collected
over the whole land a beautiful church <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>du Sacré-Cœur</foreign> has been
erected on Montmartre in Paris. The gratifying news was then
brought from Rome that the holy father had resolved on July 16th,
1875, the twenty-ninth anniversary of his ascending the papal throne
and the two hundredth anniversary of the great occurrences at Paray
le Monial, that the whole world should give adoration to the sacred
heart. In France this day was fixed upon for the laying of the
foundation stone of the church at Montmartre, and the Archbishop
of Cologne, Paul Melchers, commanded Catholic Germany to show
greater zeal in the adoration of the sacred heart, <q>ordained by divine
revelation</q> two hundred years before.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_13'/>
13. <emph>Ultramontane Amulets.</emph>&mdash;The Carmelites adopted a brown, the
Trinitarians a white, the Theatines a blue, the Servites a black, and
the Lazarites a red, scapular, assured by divine visions that the
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
wearing of them was a means of salvation. A tract, entitled <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Gnaden
und Ablässe des fünffachen Skapuliers</foreign>,</q> published by episcopal authority
at Münster in 1872, declared that any layman who wore the five
scapulars would participate in all the graces and indulgences belonging
to them severally. The most useful of all was the Carmelite
scapular, impenetrable by bullets, impervious to daggers, rendering
falls harmless, stilling stormy seas, quenching fires, healing the possessed,
the sick, the wounded, etc.&mdash;The Benedictines had no scapulars,
but they had Benedict-medals, from which they drew a rich revenue.
This amulet first made its appearance in the Bavarian Abbey of
Metten. The tract, entitled, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>St. Benediktusbüchlein oder die Medaille
d. h. Benediktus</foreign>,</q> published at Münster in 1876, tells how it cures
sicknesses, relieves toothache, stops bleeding at the nose, heals burns,
overcomes the craving for drink, protects from attacks of evil spirits,
restrains skittish horses, cures sick cattle, clears vineyards of blight,
secures the conversion of heretics and godless persons, etc.&mdash;In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1878 there appeared at Mainz, with approval of the bishop, a book in
its third edition, entitled, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Der Seraphische Gürtel und dessen wunderbare
Reichtümer nach d. Franz, d. päpstl. Hausprälaten Abbé v. Segur</foreign>,</q>
according to which Sixtus V. in 1585 founded the Archbrotherhood
of the Girdle of St. Francis. It also affirms that whoever wears this
girdle day and night and repeats the six enjoined paternosters,
participates in all the indulgences of the holy land and of all the
basilicas and sanctuaries of Rome and Assisi, and is entitled to
liberate 1,000 souls a day from purgatory.&mdash;Great miracles of healing
and preservation from all injuries to body and soul, property
and goods, are attributed by the Jesuits to the <q><emph>holy water of St.
Ignatius</emph></q> (§ 149, 11), the sale of which in Belgium, France, and
Switzerland has proved to them a lucrative business. But the mother
of God has herself favoured them with a still more powerful miracle-working
water in the fountains of Lourdes and Marpingen.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_188_Para_14'/>
14. We give in conclusion a specimen of <emph>Ultramontane pulpit
eloquence</emph>. A Bavarian priest, Kinzelmann, said in a sermon in 1872:
<q>We priests stand as far above the emperor, kings, and princes as
the heaven is above the earth.... Angels and archangels stand
beneath us, for we can in God's stead forgive sins. We occupy a
position superior to that of the mother of God, who only once bare
Christ, whereas we create and beget him every day. Yea, in a sense,
we stand above God, who must always and everywhere serve us, and
at the consecration must descend from heaven upon the mass,</q> etc.&mdash;An
apotheosis of the priesthood worthy of the Middle Ages.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_189'/>
<head>§ 189. The Vatican Council.<note place='foot'>Manning, <q>The True History of the Vatican Council.</q> London,
1877. Pomponio Leto, <q>The Vatican Council, being the impressions
of a contemporary (Card. Vitelleschi), translated from the Italian with
the original documents.</q> London, 1876. Quirinus, <q>Letters from Rome
on the Council.</q> London, 1870. Janus, <q>The Pope and the Council.</q>
London, 1869. Bungener, <q>Rome and the Council in the Nineteenth
Century.</q> Edinburgh, 1870. Arthur, <q>The Pope, the Kings, and the
People, a History of the Movement to make the Pope Governor of the
World, 1864-1871.</q> 2 vols. London, 1877. Acton, <q>History of the
Vatican Council.</q> London, 1871. Friedrich, <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Documenta ad illum.
Conc. Vat.</foreign></q> Nördling, 1871. Martin (Bishop of Paderborn), <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Omnium
Conc. Vat. quæ ad doctr. et discipl. pertin. docum. Collectio</foreign>.</q> 1873.</note></head>

<p>
Immediately after Pius IX. had, at the centenary of St.
Peter in 1867, given a hint that a general council might be
summoned at an early date, the <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Civiltà Cattolica</foreign> of Rome
made distinct statements to the effect that the most prominent
questions for discussion would be the confirming of the
syllabus (<ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>§ 185, 2</ref>), the sanctioning of the doctrine of papal
absolutism in the spirit of the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unam sanctam</foreign> of Boniface
VIII. (§ 110, 1), and the proclamation of papal infallibility.
The <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Civiltà</foreign> had already taught that <q>when the
pope thinks, it is God who thinks in him.</q> When the
council opened on the day of the immaculate conception,
December 8th, 1869, all conceivable devices of skilful diplomacy
were used by the Jesuit Camarilla, and friendly cajoling
and violent threatening on the part of the pope, in order to
silence or win over, and, in case this could not be done, to
stifle and suppress the opposition which even already was
not inconsiderable in point of numbers, but far more important
in point of moral, theological, and hierarchical influence.
The result aimed at was secured. Of the 150 original
opponents only fifty dared maintain their opposition to the
end, and even they cowardly shrank from a decisive conflict,
and wrote from their respective dioceses, as their Catholic
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
faith obliged them to do, notifying their most complete
acquiescence.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_189_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Preliminary History of the Council.</emph>&mdash;When Pius IX. on the centenary
of St. Peter made known to the assembled bishops his intention
to summon a general council, they expressed their conviction that by the
blessing of the immaculate Virgin it would be a powerful means of
securing unity, peace, and holiness. The formal summons was issued
on the day of St. Peter and St. Paul of the following year, June 29th,
1868. The end for which the council was convened was stated
generally as follows: The saving of the church and civil society from
all evils threatening them, the thwarting of the endeavours of all who
seek the overthrow of church and state, the uprooting of all modern
errors and the downfall of all godless enemies of the apostolical chair.
In Germany the Catholic General Assembly which met at Bamberg soon
after this declared that from this day a new epoch in the world's history
would begin, for <q>either the salvation of the world would result from
this council, or the world is beyond the reach of help.</q> This hopefulness
prevailed throughout the whole Catholic world. Fostered by
the utterances of the <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Civiltà Cattolica</foreign>, the excitement grew from day
to day. The learned bishop <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign> Maret, dean of the theological
faculty of Paris, now came forward as an eloquent exponent of the
Gallican liberties; even the hitherto so strict Catholic, the Count
Montalembert, to the astonishment of everybody, assumed a bold and
independent attitude in regard to the council, and energetically
protested in a publication of March 7th, 1870, six days before his
death, against the intrigues of the Jesuits and the infallibility dogma
which it was proposed to authorize. But the greatest excitement was
occasioned by the work <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Der Papst und das Konzil</foreign>,</q> published in
Leipzig, 1869, under the pseudonym <emph>Janus</emph>, of which the real authors
were Döllinger, Friedrich, and Huber of Munich, who brought up
the heavy artillery of the most comprehensive historical scholarship
against the evident intentions of the curia. The German bishops
gathered at the tomb of St. Boniface at Fulda in September, 1869, and
issued from thence a general pastoral letter to their disturbed flocks,
declaring that it was impossible that the council should decide otherwise
than in accordance with holy Scripture and the apostolic
traditions and what was already written upon the hearts of all
believing Catholics. Also the papal secretary, Card. Antonelli, quieted
the anxiety of the ambassadors of foreign powers at Rome by the
assurance that the Holy See had in view neither the confirming of
the syllabus nor the affirming of the dogma of infallibility. In vain
did the Bavarian premier, Prince Hohenlohe, insist that the heads of
other governments should combine in taking measures to prevent any
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
encroachment of the council upon the rights of the state. The great
powers resolved to maintain simply a watchful attitude, and only too
late addressed earnest expostulations and threats.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_189_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Organization of the Council.</emph>&mdash;Of 1,044 prelates entitled to take
part in the council 767 made their appearance, of whom 276 were
Italians and 119 bishops <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, all pliable satellites of the curia,
as were also the greater number of the missionary bishops, who, with
their assistants in the propaganda, were supported at the cost of the
holy father. The sixty-two bishops of the Papal States were doubly
subject to the pope, and of the eighty Spanish and South American
bishops it was affirmed in Rome that they would be ready at the
bidding of the holy father to define the Trinity as consisting of four
persons. Forty Italian cardinals and thirty generals of orders were
equally dependable. The Romance races were represented by no less
than 600, the German by no more than fourteen. For the first time
since general councils were held was the laity entirely excluded from
all influence in the proceedings, even the ambassadors of Catholic and
tolerant powers. The order of business drawn up by the pope was
arranged in all its details so as to cripple the opposition. The right
of all fathers of the council to make proposals was indeed conceded,
but a committee chosen by the pope decided as to their admissibility.
From the special commissions, whose presidents were nominated by
the pope, the drafts of decrees were issued to the general congregation,
where the president could at will interrupt any speaker and require
him to retract. Instead of the unanimity required by the canon law
in matters of faith, a simple majority of votes was declared sufficient.
A formal protest of the minority against these and similar unconstitutional
proposals was left quite unheeded. The proceedings were
indeed taken down by shorthand reporters, but not even members of
council were allowed to see these reports. The conclusions of the
general congregation were sent back for final revision to the special
commissions, and when at last brought up again in the public sessions,
they were not discussed, but simply voted on with a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign> or a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non-placet</foreign>.
The right transept of St. Peter's was the meeting place of the
council, the acoustics of which were as bad as possible, but the pope
refused every request for more suitable accommodation. Besides, the
various members spoke with diverse accents, and many had but a
defective knowledge of Latin. Although absolute secresy was enjoined
on pain of falling into mortal sin, under the excitement of the day
so much trickled out and was in certain Romish circles so carefully
gathered and sifted, that a tolerably complete insight was reached into
the inner movements of the council. From such sources the author of
the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Römischen Briefe</foreign>,</q> supposed to have been Lord Acton, a friend
and scholar of Döllinger, drew the material for his account, which,
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
carried by trusty messengers beyond the bounds of the Papal State,
reached Munich, and there, after careful revision by Döllinger and
his friends, were published in the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Augsburg Allg. Zeitung</foreign>. Also
Prof. Friedrich of Munich, who had accompanied Card. Hohenlohe
to Rome as theological adviser, collected what he could learn in episcopal
and theological circles in a journal which was published at a
later date.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_189_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Proceedings of the Council.</emph>&mdash;The first public session of December
8th, 1869, was occupied with opening ceremonies; the second, of January
6th, with the subscription of the confession of faith on the part of
each member. The first preliminary was the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>schema</foreign> of the faith, the
second that on church discipline. Then followed the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>schema</foreign> on the
church and the primacy of the pope in three articles: the legal
position of the church in reference to the state, the absolute supremacy
of the pope over the whole church on the principles of the Pseudo-Isidore
(§ 87, 2) and the assumptions of Gregory VII., Innocent III.
and Boniface VIII., reproduced in the principal propositions of the
syllabus (<ref target='Section_184_Para_2'>§ 184, 2</ref>), and the outlines of a catechism to be enforced as
a manual for the instruction of youth throughout the church. On
March 6th there was added by way of supplement to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>schema</foreign> of
the church a fourth article in the form of a sketch of the decree of
infallibility. Soon after the opening of the council an agitation in
this direction had been started. An address to the pope emanating
from the Jesuit college petitioning for this was speedily signed by 400
subscribers. A counter address with 137 signatures besought the
pope not to make any such proposal. At the head of the agitation
in favour of infallibility stood archbishops Manning of Westminster,
Deschamps of Mechlin, Spalding of Baltimore, and bishops Fessler
of St. Pölten, secretary of the council, Senestrey of Regensburg, the
<q>overthrower of thrones</q> (<ref target='Section_197_Para_1'>§ 197, 1</ref>), Martin of Paderborn, and, as
bishop <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Mermillod of Geneva. Among the leaders of the
opposition the most prominent were cardinals Rauscher of Vienna,
Prince Schwarzenberg of Prague and Matthieu of Besançon, Prince-bishop
Förster of Breslau, archbishops Scherr of Munich, Melchers
of Cologne, Darboy of Paris, and Kenrick of St. Louis, the bishops
Ketteler of Mainz, Dinkel of Augsburg, Hefele of Rottenburg,
Strossmayer of Sirmium, Dupanloup of Orleans, etc.&mdash;Owing to the
discussions on the <emph>Schema of the Faith</emph> there occurred on March 22nd
a stormy scene, which in its wild uproar reminds one of the disgraceful
<emph>Robber Synod of Ephesus</emph> (§ 52, 4). When Bishop Strossmayer
objected to the statement made in the preamble, that the indifferentism,
pantheism, atheism, and materialism prevailing in these days are
chargeable upon Protestantism, as contrary to truth, the furious
fathers of the majority amid shouts and roars, shaking of their fists,
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
rushed upon the platform, and the president was obliged to adjourn
the sitting. At the next session the objectionable statement was
withdrawn and the entire <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>schema</foreign> of the faith was unanimously
adopted at the third public sitting of the council on April 24th.
<emph>The Schema of the Church</emph> came up for a consideration on May 10th.
The discussion turned first and mainly on the fourth article about
the infallibility of the pope. Its biblical foundation was sought in
Luke xxii. 32, its traditional basis chiefly in the well-known passage
of Irenæus (§ 34, 8) and on its supposed endorsement by the general
councils of Lyons and Florence (§ 67, 4, 6), but the main stress was
laid on its necessarily following from the position of the pope as the
representative of Christ. The opposition party had from the outset
their position weakened by the conduct of many of their adherents who,
partly to avoid giving excessive annoyance to the pope, and partly to
leave a door open for their retreat, did not contest the correctness of the
doctrine in question, but all the more decidedly urged the inopportuneness
of its formal definition as threatening the church with a schism
and provocative of dangerous conflicts with the civil power. The
longer the decision was deferred by passionate debates, the more
determinedly did the pope throw the whole weight of his influence
into the scales. By bewitching kindliness he won some, by sharp,
angry words he terrified others. He denounced opponents as sectarian
enemies of the church and the apostolic chair, and styled them
ignoramuses, slaves of princes, and cowards. He trusted the aid of
the blessed Virgin to ward off threatened division. To the question
whether he himself regarded the formulating of the dogma as opportune,
he answered: <q>No, but as necessary.</q> Urged by the Jesuits, he confidently
declared that it was notorious that the whole church at all
times taught the absolute infallibility of the pope; and on another
occasion he silenced a modest doubt as to a sure tradition with the
dictatorial words, <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>La tradizione sono io</foreign>, adding the assurance, <q>As
Abbáte Mastai I believe in infallibility, as pope I have experienced it.</q>
On July 13th the final vote was called for in the general congregation.
There were 371 who voted simply <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign>, sixty-one <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet juxta modum</foreign>,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> with certain modifications, and eighty-eight <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non placet</foreign>. After a
last hopeless attempt by a deputation to obtain the pope's consent to a
milder formulating of the decree, Bishop Ketteler vainly entreating
on his knees, to save the unity and peace of the church by some small
concession, the fifty hitherto steadfast members of the minority
returned home, after emitting a written declaration that they after
as well as before must continue to adhere to their negative vote, but
from reverence and respect for the person of the pope they declined to
give effect to it at a public session. On the following day, July 18th,
the fourth and last public sitting was held: 547 fathers voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign>
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
and only two, Riccio of Cajazzo and Fitzgerald of Little Rock, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non
placet</foreign>. A violent storm had broken out during the session and amid
thunder and lightning, Pius IX., like <q>a second Moses</q> (Exod. xix.
16), proclaimed in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pastor æternus</foreign> the absolute plenipotence and
infallibility of himself and all his predecessors and successors.&mdash;It was
on the evening preceding the proclamation of this new dogma that
Napoleon III. proclaimed war with Prussia, in consequence of which
the pope lost the last remnants of temporal sovereignty and every
chance of its restoration. Under the influence of the fever-fraught
July sun, the council now dwindled down to 150 members, and, after
the whole glory of the papal kingdom had gone down (<ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>§ 185, 3</ref>), on
October 20th, its sittings were suspended until better times. The
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>schema</foreign> of discipline and the preliminary sketch of a catechism were
not concluded; a subsequently introduced <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>schema</foreign> on apostolic missions
was left in the same state; and a petition equally pressed by the
Jesuits for the defining of the corporeal ascension of Mary had not
even reached the initial stage.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_189_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Acceptance of the Decrees of the Council.</emph>&mdash;All protests which during
the council the minority had made against the order of business
determined on and against all irregularities resulting from it, because
not persisted in, were regarded as invalid. Equally devoid of legal
force was their final written protest which they left behind, in which
they expressly declined to exercise their right of voting. And the
assent which they ultimately without exception gave to the objective
standpoint of the law and the faith of the Catholic church, was not in
the least necessary in order to make it appear that the decisions of the
council, drawn up with such unanimity as had scarcely ever before been
seen, were equally valid with any of the decrees of the older councils.
Thus the bishops of the minority, if they did not wish to occasion a
split of unexampled dimensions and incalculable complications, quarrels,
and contentions in the church that boasted of a unity which had
hitherto been its strength and stay, could do nothing else than yield
at the twelfth hour to the pope's demand that <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>sacrificio dell'intelletto</foreign></q>
which at the eleventh hour they had refused. The German bishops,
who had proved most steadfast at the council, were now in the greatest
haste to make their submission. Even by the end of August, at Fulda,
they joined their infallibilist neighbours in addressing a pastoral
letter, in which they most solemnly declared that all true Catholics,
as they valued their soul's salvation, must unconditionally accept the
conclusions of the council unanimously arrived at which are in no way
prejudiced by the <q>differences of opinion</q> elicited during the discussion.
At the same time they demanded of theological professors,
teachers of religion, and clergymen throughout the dioceses a formal
acceptance of these decrees as the inviolable standpoint of their
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
doctrinal teaching; they also took measures against those who refused
to yield, and excommunicated them. Even Bishop Hefele, who did
not sign this pastoral and was at first determined not to yield nor
swerve, at last gave way. In his pastoral proclaiming the new dogma
he gave it a quite inadmissible interpretation: As the infallibility of
the church, so also that of the pope as a teacher, extends only to the
revealed doctrines of faith and morals, and even with reference to
them only the definitions proper and not the introductory statements,
grounds, and applications, belong to the infallible department. But
subsequently he cast himself unreservedly into the arms of his
colleagues assembled once again at Fulda in September, 1872, where
he also found his like-minded friend, Bishop Haneberg of Spires. Yet
he forbore demanding an express assent from his former colleagues
at Tübingen and his clergy, and thus saved Württemberg from a
threatened schism. Strossmayer held out longest, but even he at last
threw down his weapons. But many of the most cultured and
scholarly of the theological professors, disgusted with the course events
were taking, withdrew from the field and continued silently to hold
their own opinions. The inferior clergy, for the most part trained by
ultramontane bigots, and held in the iron grasp of strict hierarchical
discipline, passed all bounds in their extravagant glorification of the
new dogma. And while among the liberal circles of the Catholic
laity it was laughed at and ridiculed, the bigoted nobles and the
masses who had long been used to the incensed atmosphere of an
enthusiastic adoration of the pope, bowed the knee in stupid devotion
to the papal god. But the brave heart of one noble German lady
broke with sorrow over the indignity done by the Vatican decree and
the characterlessness of the German bishops to the church of which
to her latest breath she remained in spirit a devoted member. Amalie
von Lasaulx, sister of the Munich scholar Ernst von Lasaulx (<ref target='Section_174_Para_4'>§ 174, 4</ref>),
from 1849 superioress of the Sisters of Mercy in St. John's Hospital at
Bonn, lay beyond hope of recovery on a sick-bed to which she had been
brought by her self-sacrificing and faithful discharge of the duties of
her calling, when there came to her from the lady superior of the
order at Nancy the peremptory demand to give in her adhesion to the
infallibility dogma. As she persistently and courageously withstood
all entreaties and threats, all adjurations and cruelly tormenting
importunings, she was deposed from office and driven from the scene
of her labours, and when, soon thereafter, in 1872, she died, the habit
of her order was stripped from her body. The Old Catholics of Bonn,
whose proceedings she had not countenanced, charged themselves
with securing for her a Christian burial.&mdash;No state as such has recognised
the council. Austria answered it by abolishing the concordat
and forbidding the proclamation of the decrees. Bavaria and Saxony
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
refused their <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign>; Hesse, Baden, and Württemberg declared that the
conclusions of the council had not binding authority in law. Prussia
indeed held to its principle of not interfering in the internal affairs
of the Catholic church, but, partly for itself, partly as the leading
power of the new German empire, passed a series of laws in order to
resume its too readily abandoned rights of sovereignty over the affairs
of the Catholic church, and to insure itself against further encroachments
of ultramontanism upon the domain of civil life (<ref target='Section_197'>§ 197</ref>). The
Romance states, on the other hand, pre-eminently France, were prevented
by internal troubles and conflicts from taking any very
decisive steps.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_190'/>
<head>§ 190. The Old Catholics.</head>

<p>
A most promising reaction, mainly in Germany, led by
men highly respected and eminent for their learning, set in
against the Vatican Council and its decrees, in the so-called
Old Catholic movement of the liberal circles of the Catholic
people, which went the length, even in 1873, of establishing
an independent and well organized episcopal church. Since
then, indeed, it has fallen far short of the all too sanguine
hopes and expectations at first entertained; but still within
narrower limits it continues steadily to spread and to rear
for itself a solid structure, while carefully, even nervously,
shrinking from anything revolutionary. More in touch with
the demands of the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zeitgeist</foreign> in its reformatory concessions,
yet holding firmly in every particular to the positive
doctrines of orthodoxy, the Old Catholic movement has made
progress in Switzerland, while in other Catholic countries
its success has been relatively small.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_190_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Formation and Development of the Old Catholic Church in the German
Empire.</emph>&mdash;In the beginning of August, 1870, the hitherto exemplary
Catholic professor Michelis of Braunsberg (<ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>§ 191, 6</ref>), issued a public
charge against Pius IX. as a heretic and devourer of the church, and
by the end of August several distinguished theologians (Döllinger
and Friedrich of Munich, Reinkens, Weber, and Baltzer of Breslau,
Knoodt of Bonn, and the canonist Von Schulte of Prague) joined him
at Nuremberg in making a public declaration that the Vatican Council
could not be regarded as œcumenical, nor its new dogma as a Catholic
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
doctrine. This statement was subscribed to by forty-four Catholic
professors of the university of Munich with the rector at their head,
but without the theologians. Similarly, too, several Catholic teachers
in Breslau, Freiburg, Würzburg, and Bonn protested, and still more
energetically a gathering of Catholic laymen at Königswinter.
Besides the Breslau professors already named, the Bonn professors
Reusch, Langen, Hilgers, and Knoodt refused to subscribe the council
decrees at the call of their bishop; whereas the Munich professors,
with the exception of Döllinger and Friedrich, yielded. A repeated
injunction of his archbishop in January, 1871, drew from Döllinger
the statement that he as a Christian, a theologian, a historian, and
a citizen, was obliged to reject the infallibility dogma, while at the
same time he was prepared before an assembly of bishops and
theologians to prove that it was opposed to Scripture, the Fathers,
tradition, and history. He was now literally overwhelmed with complimentary
addresses from Vienna, Würzburg, Munich, and almost
all other cities of Bavaria; and an address to government on the
dangers to the state threatened by the Vatican decrees that lay at the
Munich Museum, was quickly filled with 12,000 signatures. On April
14th, Döllinger was excommunicated, and Professor Huber sent an
exceedingly sharp reply to the archbishop. After several preliminary
meetings, the <emph>first congress</emph> of the Old Catholics was held in Munich
in September, 1871, attended by 500 deputies from all parts of Germany.
A programme was unanimously adopted which, with protestation of
firm adherence to the faith, worship, and constitution of the ancient
Catholic church, maintained the invalidity of the Vatican decrees and
the excommunication occasioned by them, and, besides recognising the
Old Catholic church of Utrecht (<ref target='Section_165_Para_8'>§ 165, 8</ref>), expressed a hope of reunion
with the Greek church, as well as of a gradual progress towards an
understanding with the Protestant church. But when at the second
session the president, Dr. von Schulte, proposed the setting up of independent
public services with regular pastors, and the establishing
as soon as possible of an episcopal government of their own, Döllinger
contested the proposal as a forsaking of the safe path of lawful opposition,
taking the baneful course of the Protestant Reformation, and
tending toward the formation of a sect. As, however, the proposal
was carried by an overwhelming majority, he declined to take further
part in their public assemblies and retired more into the background,
without otherwise opposing the prevailing current or detaching
himself from it. The second congress was held at Cologne in the
autumn of 1872. From the episcopal churches of England and
America, from the orthodox church of Russia, from France, Italy,
and Spain, were sent deputies and hearty friendly greetings. Archbishop
Loos of Utrecht, by the part which he took in the congress,
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
cemented more closely the union with the Old Catholics of Holland.
Even the German <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign></q> was not unrepresented. A
committee chosen for the purpose drew up an outline of a synodal and
congregational order, which provides for the election of bishops at an
annual meeting at Pentecost of a synod, of which all the clergy are
members and to which the congregations send deputies, one for every
200 members. Alongside of the bishop stands a permanent synodal
board of five priests and seven laymen. The bishop and synodal board
have the right of vetoing doubtful decrees of synod. The choice of
pastors lies with the congregation; its confirmation belongs to the
bishop. In July, 1873, a bishop was elected in the Pantaleon church
of Cologne by an assembly of delegates, embracing twenty-two priests
and fifty-five laymen. The choice fell upon Professor Reinkens, who,
as meanwhile Bishop Loos of Utrecht had died, was consecrated on
August 11th, at Rotterdam, by Bishop Heykamp of Deventer, and
selected Bonn as his episcopal residence.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_190_Para_2'/>
2. The first synod of the German Old Catholics, consisting of thirty
clerical and fifty-nine lay members, met at Bonn in May, 1874. It was
agreed to continue the practice of auricular confession, but without
any pressure being put upon the conscience or its observance being
insisted upon at set times. Similarly the moral value of fasting was
recognised, but all compulsory abstinence, and all distinctions of food
as allowable and unallowable, were abolished. The second synod,
with reference to the marriage law, took the position that civil regular
marriages ought also to have the blessing of the church; only in the
case of marriages with non-Christians and divorced parties should
this be refused. The third synod introduced a German ritual in
which the exorcism was omitted, while the Latin mass was provisionally
retained. The fourth synod allowed to such congregations as
might wish it the use of the vernacular in several parts of the service
of the mass. At all these synods the lay members had persistently
repeated the proposal to abolish the obligatory celibacy of the clergy.
But now the agitation, especially on the part of the Baden representatives,
had become so keen, that at the fifth synod of 1878, in
spite of the warning read by Bishop Reinkens from the Dutch Old
Catholics, who threatened to withdraw from the communion, the
proposal was carried by seventy-five votes against twenty-two. The
Bonn professors, Langen and Menzel, foreseeing this result, had
absented themselves from the synod, Reusch immediately withdrew
and resigned his office as episcopal vicar-general, Friedrich protested
in the name of the Bavarian Old Catholics. Reinkens, too, had
vigorously opposed the movement; whereas Knoodt, Michelis, and
Von Schulte had favoured it. The synod of 1883 resolved to dispense
the supper in both kinds to members of the Anglican church residing
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
in Germany, but among their own members to follow meanwhile the
usual practice of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>communio sub una</foreign>. The number of Old Catholic
congregations in the German empire is now 107, with 38,507 adherents
and 56 priests.&mdash;Even at their first congress the German Old Catholics,
in opposition to the unpatriotic and law-defying attitude of German
ultramontanism, had insisted upon love of country and obedience to
the laws of the state as an absolute Christian duty. Their newly
chosen bishop Reinkens, too, gave expression to this sentiment in his
first pastoral letter, and had the oath of allegiance administered him
by the Prussian, Baden, and Hessian governments. But Bavaria felt
obliged, on account of the terms of its concordat, to refuse. At first
the Old Catholics had advanced the claim to be the only true representatives
of the Catholic church as it had existed before July 18th,
1870. At the Cologne congress they let this assumption drop, and
restricted their claims upon the state to equal recognition with <q>the
New Catholics,</q> equal endowments for their bishop, and a fair proportion
of the churches and their revenues. Prussia responded with a
yearly episcopal grant of 16,000 thalers; Baden added about 6,000.
It proved more difficult to enforce their claim to church property. A
law was passed in Baden in 1874, which not only guaranteed to the
Old Catholic clergy their present benefices and incomes, freed them
from the jurisdiction of the Romish hierarchy, and gave them permission
to found independent congregations, but also granted them a mutual
right of possessing and using churches and church furniture as well as
sharing in church property according to the numerical proportion of
the two parties in the district. A similar measure was introduced
into the Prussian parliament, and obtained the royal assent in July,
1875. Since then, however, the interest of the government in the Old
Catholic movement has visibly cooled. In Baden, in 1886 the endowment
had risen to 24,000 marks.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_190_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Old Catholics in other Lands.</emph>&mdash;<emph>In Switzerland</emph> the Old, or
rather, as it has there been called, the Christian, Catholic movement,
had its origin in 1871 in the diocese of Basel-Solothurn, whence it soon
spread through the whole country. The national synod held at Olten
in 1876 introduced the vernacular into the church services, abolished
the compulsory celibacy of the clergy and obligatory confession of
communicants, and elected Professor Herzog bishop, Reinkens giving
him episcopal consecration. In 1879 the number of Christian Catholics
in German Switzerland amounted to about 70,000, with seventy-two
pastors. But since then, in consequence of the submission of the
Roman Catholics to the church laws condemned by Pius IX. they
have lost the majority in no fewer than thirty-nine out of the forty-three
congregations of Canton Bern, and therewith the privileges
attached. A proposal made in the grand council of the canton in
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
1883 for the suppression of the Christian Catholic theological faculty
in the University of Bern, which has existed since 1874, was rejected
by one hundred and fifty votes against thirteen.&mdash;<emph>In Austria</emph>, too, strong
opposition was shown to the infallibility dogma. At Vienna the first
Old Catholic congregation was formed in February, 1872, under the
priest Anton; and soon after others were established in Bohemia and
Upper Austria. But it was not till October, 1877, that they obtained
civil recognition on the ground that their doctrine is that which the
Catholic church professed before 1870. In June, 1880, they held their
first legally sanctioned synod. The provisional synodical and congregational
order was now definitely adopted, and the use of the vernacular
in the church services, the abolition of compulsory fasting, confession,
and celibacy, as well as of surplice fees, and the abandoning of all but
the high festivals, were announced on the following Sunday. The
bitter hatred shown by the Czechs and the ultramontane clergy to
everything German has given to the Old Catholic movement for some
years past a new impulse and decided advantage.&mdash;<emph>In France</emph> the Abbé
Michaud of Paris lashed the characterlessness of the episcopate and
was excommunicated, and the Abbés Mouls and Junqua of Bordeaux
were ordered by the police to give up wearing the clerical dress.
Junqua, refusing to obey this order, was accused by Cardinal Donnet,
Bishop of Bordeaux, before the civil court, and was sentenced to six
months' imprisonment. Not till 1879 did the ex-Carmelite Loyson of
Paris lay the foundation of a Catholic Gallican church, affiliated with
the Swiss Old Catholics (<ref target='Section_187_Para_8'>§ 187, 8</ref>).&mdash;<emph>In Italy</emph> since 1862, independently
of the German movement, yet on essentially the same grounds, a
national Italian church was started with very promising beginnings,
which were not, however, realized (<ref target='Section_187_Para_7'>§ 187, 7</ref>). Rare excitement was
caused throughout Italy by the procedure of Count Campello, canon
of St. Peter's in Rome, who in 1881 publicly proclaimed his creed in
the Methodist Episcopal chapel, there renouncing the papacy, and in a
published manifesto addressed to the cathedral chapter justified this
step and made severe charges against the papal curia; but soon after,
in a letter to Loyson, he declared that he, remaining faithful to the
true Catholic church, did not contemplate joining any Protestant sect
severed from Catholic unity, and in a communication to the Old
Catholic Rieks of Heidelberg professed to be in all points at one with
the German Old Catholics. Accordingly he sought to form in Rome
a Catholic reform party, whose interests he advocated in the journal
<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Il Labaro</foreign>. The pope's domestic chaplain, Monsignor Savarese, has
adopted a similar attitude. In December, 1883, he was received by
the pastor of the American Episcopal church at Rome into the Old
Catholic church on subscribing the Nicene Creed. In 1886 they were
joined by another domestic chaplain of the pope, Monsignor Renier,
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
formerly an intimate friend of Pius IX., who publicly separated himself
from the papal church, and with them took his place at the head
of a Catholic <q><emph>Congregation of St. Paul</emph></q> in Rome.&mdash;Also the Episcopal
<foreign lang='es' rend='italic'>Iglesia Española</foreign> in Spain (<ref target='Section_205_Para_4'>§ 205, 4</ref>), and the Mexican <foreign lang='es' rend='italic'>Iglesia de
Jesus</foreign> (<ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>§ 209, 1</ref>), must be regarded as essentially of similar tendencies
to the Old Catholics.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_191'/>
<head>§ 191. Catholic Theology, especially in Germany.</head>

<p>
Catholic theology in Germany, influenced by the scientific
spirit prevailing in Protestantism, received a considerable
impulse. From latitudinarian Josephinism it gradually rose
toward a strictly ecclesiastical attitude. Most important
were its contributions in the department of dogmatic and
speculative theology. Besides and after the schools of
Hermes, Baader, and Günther, condemned by the papal
chair, appeared a whole series of speculative dogmatists
who kept their speculations within the limits of the church
confession. Also in the domain of church history, Catholic
theology, after the epoch-making productions of Möhler and
Döllinger, has aided in reaching important results, which,
however, owing to the <q>tendency</q> character of their researches,
demand careful sifting. Least important are their
contributions to biblical criticism and exegesis. In general,
however, the theological <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>docents</foreign> at the German universities
give a scientific character to their researches and lectures
in respect of form and also of matter, so far as the Tridentine
limits will allow. But the more the Jesuits obtained
influence in Germany, the more was that scholasticism, which
repudiated the German university theology and opposed it
with perfidious suspicions and denunciations, naturalized,
especially in the episcopal seminaries, while it was recommended
by Rome as the official theology. The attempt,
however, at the Munich Congress of Scholars in 1863 to
come to an understanding between the two tendencies failed,
owing to the contrariety of their principles and the opposition
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
of the Jesuits.&mdash;Outside of Germany, French theology,
especially in the department of history, manifested a praiseworthy
activity. In Spain theology has never outgrown
the period of the Middle Ages. In Italy, on the other hand,
the study of Christian antiquities flourished, stimulated by
recent discoveries of treasures in catacombs, museums,
archives, and libraries.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Hermes and his School.</emph>&mdash;The Bonn professor, <emph>George Hermes</emph>, influenced
in youth by the critical philosophy, passed the Catholic
dogma of Trent, assured it would stand the test, through the fire of
doubt and the scrutiny of reason, because only what survives such
examination could be scientifically vindicated. He died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1831,
and left a school named after him, mainly in Treves, Bonn, and
Breslau. Gregory XVI. in 1835 condemned his writings, and the new
Archbishop of Cologne, Droste-Vischering, forbad students at Bonn
attending the lectures of Hermesians. These made every effort to
secure the recall of the papal censure. Braun and Elvenich went
to Rome, but their declaration that Hermes had not taught what the
pope condemned profited them as little as a similar statement had
the Jansenists. There now arose on both sides a bitter controversy,
which received new fuel from the Prusso-Cologne ecclesiastical strife
(<ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>§ 193, 1</ref>). Finally in 1844 professors Braun and Achterfeld of Bonn
were deprived of office by the coadjutor-Archbishop Geissel, and the
Prussian government acquiesced. The professors of the Treves
seminary and Baltzer of Breslau, the latter influenced by Günther's
theology, retracted.&mdash;A year before Hermes' condemnation the same
pope had condemned the opposite theory of Abbé <emph>Bautain</emph> of Strassburg,
that the Christian dogmas cannot be proved but only believed,
and that therefore all use of reason in the appropriation of the truths
of salvation is excluded. Bautain, as an obedient son of the church,
immediately retracted, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>laudabiliter se subjecit</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Baader and his School.</emph>&mdash;Catholic theology for a long time paid no
regard to the development of German philosophy. Only after Schelling,
whose philosophy had many points of contact with the Catholic
doctrine, a general interest in such studies was awakened as forming
a speculative basis for Catholicism. To the theosophy of Schelling
based on that of the Görlitz shoemaker (<ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>§ 160, 2</ref>), <emph>Francis von Baader</emph>,
professor of speculative dogmatics at Munich, though not a professional
theologian, but a physician and a mineralogist, attached
himself. In his later years he went over completely to ultramontanism.
His scholar <emph>Franz Hoffmann</emph> of Würzburg has given an exposition of
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
Baader's speculative system. At Giessen this system was represented
by Leop. Schmid (<ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>§ 187, 3</ref>). All the Catholic adherents of this school
are distinguished by their friendly attitude toward Protestantism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Günther and his School.</emph>&mdash;A theology of at least equal speculative
power and of more decidedly Catholic contents than that of Baader,
was set forth by the secular priest <emph>Anton Günther</emph> of Vienna, a
profound and original thinker of combative humour, sprightly wit,
and a roughness of expression sometimes verging upon the burlesque.
He recognised the necessity of going up in philosophical and theological
speculation to Descartes, who held by the scholastic dualism
of God and the creature, the Absolute and the finite, spirit and nature,
while all philosophy, according to him, had been ever plunging deeper
into pantheistic monism. Thence he sought to solve the two problems
of Christian speculation, creation and incarnation, and undertook a
war of extermination against <q>all monism and semimonism, idealistic
and realistic pantheism, disguised and avowed semipantheism,</q> among
Catholics and Protestants. His first great work, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vorschule zur
Spekul. Theologie</foreign>,</q> published in 1828, treating of the theory of creation
and the theory of incarnation, was followed by a long series of similar
works. His most eminent scholars were <emph>Pabst</emph>, doctor of medicine in
Vienna, who gave clear expositions of his master's dark and aphoristic
sayings, and <emph>Veith</emph>, who popularized his teachings in sermons and
practical treatises. Some of the Hermesians, such as Baltzer of
Breslau, entered the rank of his scholars. The historico-political
papers, however, charged him with denying the mysteries of Christianity,
rejecting the traditional theology, etc., and Clemens, a <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>privatdocent</foreign>
of philosophy in Bonn, became the mouthpiece of this party.
Thus arose a passionate controversy, which called forth the attention
of Rome. We might have expected Günther to meet the fate of
Hermes twenty years before; but the matter was kept long under
consideration, for strong influence from Vienna was brought to bear
on his behalf. At last in January, 1857, the formal reprobation of
the Güntherian philosophy was announced, and all his works put in
the Index. Günther humbly submitted to the sentence of the church.
So too did <emph>Baltzer</emph>. But being suspected at Rome, he was asked
voluntarily to resign. This Baltzer refused to do. Then Prince-Bishop
Förster called upon the government to deprive him; and when
this failed, he withdrew from him the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>missio canonica</foreign> and a third of
his canonical revenues, and in 1870, on his opposing the infallibility
dogma, he withheld the other two-thirds. His salary from the State
continued to be paid in full till his death in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1871.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>John Adam Möhler.</emph>&mdash;None of all the Catholic theologians of recent
times attained the importance and influence of Möhler in his short
life of forty-two years. Stimulated to seek higher scientific culture
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
by the study mainly of Schleiermacher's works and those of other
Protestants, and putting all his rich endowments at the service of the
church, he won for himself among Catholics a position like that of
Schleiermacher among Protestants. His first treatise of 1825, on the
unity of the church, was followed by his <q>Athanasius the Great,</q>
and the work of his life, the <q>Symbolics</q> of 1832, in its ninth edition
in 1884, which with the apparatus of Protestant science combats the
Protestant church doctrine and presented the Catholic doctrine in
such an ennobled and sublimated form, that Rome at first seriously
thought of placing it in the Index. Hitherto Protestants had utterly
ignored the productions of Catholic theology, but to overlook a
scientific masterpiece like this would be a confession of their own
weakness. And in fact, during the whole course of the controversy
between the two churches, no writing from the Catholic camp ever
caused such commotion among the Protestants as this. The ablest
Protestant replies are those of Nitsch and Baur. In 1835 Möhler left
Tübingen for Munich; but sickness hindered his scientific labours,
and, in 1838, in the full bloom of manhood, the Catholic church and
Catholic science had to mourn his death. He can scarcely be said to
have formed a school; but by writings, addresses, and conversation
he produced a scientific ferment in the Catholic theology of Germany,
which continued to work until at last completely displaced by the
scholasticism reintroduced into favour by the Jesuits.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>John Jos. Ignat. von Döllinger.</emph>&mdash;Of all Catholic theologians in
Germany, alongside of and after Möhler, by far the most famous on
either side of the Alps was the church historian Döllinger, professor
at Munich since 1826. His first important work issued in that same
year was on the <q>Doctrine of the Eucharist in the First Three
Centuries.</q> His comprehensive work, <q>The History of the Christian
Church,</q> of 1833 (4 vols., London, 1840), was not carried beyond the
second volume; and his <q>Text-book of Church History</q> of 1836,
was only carried down to the Reformation. The tone of his writings
was strictly ecclesiastical, yet without condoning the moral faults of
the popes and hierarchy. Great excitement was produced by his
treatise on <q>The Reformation,</q> in which he gathered everything that
could be found unfavourable to the Reformers and their work, and
thus gained the summit of renown as a miracle of erudition and a
master of Catholic orthodoxy. Meanwhile in 1838 he had taken part
in controversies about mixed marriages (<ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>§ 193, 1</ref>), and in 1843 over
the genuflection question (<ref target='Section_195_Para_2'>§ 195, 2</ref>), with severely hierarchical
pamphlets. As delegate of the university since 1845 he defended with
brilliant eloquence in the Bavarian chamber the measures of the
ultramontane government and the hierarchy, became in 1847 Provost
of St. Cajetan, but was also in the same year involved in the overthrow
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
of the Abel ministry, and was deprived of his professorship. In the
following year he was one of the most distinguished of the Catholic
section in the Frankfort parliament, where he fought successfully in
the hierarchical interest for the unconditional freedom and independence
of the church. King Maximilian II. restored him to his
professorship in 1849. From this time his views of confessional
matters became milder and more moderate. He first caused great
offence to his ultramontane admirers at Easter, 1861, when he in a
series of public lectures delivered one on the Papal States then
threatened, in which he declared that the temporal power of the pope,
the abuses of which he had witnessed during a journey to Rome in
1857, was by no means necessary for the Catholic church, but was
rather hurtful. The papal nuncio, who was present, ostentatiously
left the meeting, and the ultramontanes were beside themselves with
astonishment, horror, and wrath. Döllinger gave some modifying
explanations at the autumn assembly of the Catholic Union at Munich
in 1861. But soon thereafter appeared his work, <q>The Church and
the Churches</q> (London, 1862), which gave the lecture slightly modified
as an appendix. The <q>Fables respecting the Popes of the Middle
Ages</q> (London, 1871), was as little to the taste of the ultramontanes.
Indeed in these writings, especially in the first named, the polemic
against the Protestant Church had all its old bitterness; but he is at
least more just toward Luther, whom he characterizes as <q>the most
powerful man of the people, the most popular character, which
Germany ever possessed.</q> And while he delivers a glowing panegyric
on the person of the pope, he lashes unrelentingly the misgovernment
of the Papal States. At the Congress of Scholars at Munich he
contended for the freedom of science. Döllinger as president of the
congress sent the pope a telegram which satisfied his holiness. But
the Jesuits looked deeper, and immediately <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>il povero Döllinger</foreign></q> was
loaded by the <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Civiltà Cattolica</foreign> with every conceivable reproach. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
1868 nominated to the life office of imperial councillor, he voted with
the bishops against the liberal education scheme of the government.
But his battle against the council and infallibility made the rent
incurable, and his angry archbishop hurled against him the great
excommunication. Then Vienna made him doctor of philosophy,
Marburg, Oxford, and Edinburgh gave him LL.D., and the senate
of his university unanimously elected him rector in 1871. But his
tabooed lecture room became more and more deserted. He took no
prominent part in the organizing of the Old Catholic church (<ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>§ 190, 1</ref>),
but all the more eagerly did he seek to promote its union negotiations
(<ref target='Section_175_Para_6'>§ 175, 6</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The Chief Representatives of Systematic Theology.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Klee</emph>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1800-1840,
of Bonn and Munich, was a positivist of the old school, and
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
during the Hermesian controversy a supporter of the theology of the
curia. <emph>Hirscher</emph>, 1788-1865, of Freiburg, numbered by the liberals as
one of their ornaments and by the fanatical ultramontanes as a heretic,
did much to promote a conciliatory and moderate Catholicism, equally
free from ultramontane and rationalistic tendencies, abandoning
nothing essential in the Catholic doctrine. <emph>Hilgers</emph>, the Hermesian,
afterwards joined the Old Catholics of Bonn. <emph>Staudenmaier</emph> and <emph>Sengler</emph>
of Freiburg and <emph>Berlage</emph> of Münster held a distinguished rank as
speculative theologians. In the same department, <emph>Kuhn</emph> and <emph>Drey</emph> of
Tübingen, <emph>Ehrlich</emph> of Prague, <emph>Deutinger</emph> of Dillingen, a disciple of
Schelling and Baader, and as such persecuted, though a pious believing
Catholic, <emph>Oischinger</emph> of Munich, who in despair at the proclamation
of the Vatican decree suddenly stopped his fruitful literary activity,
<emph>Dieringer</emph> of Bonn, who for the same reason not only ceased to write
but also in 1871 resigned his professorship and retired to a small
country pastorate, and finally, <emph>Hettinger</emph> of Würzburg, best known
by his <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Apologie d. Christenthums</foreign>.</q>&mdash;While the above-named, though
suspected and opposed by the scholastic party, strove to preserve
intact their ecclesiastical Catholic character, other representatives of
this tendency by their struggles against scholasticism and then against
the Vatican Council, were driven away from their orthodox position.
Thus <emph>Frohschammer</emph> of Munich, when his treatise on <q>The Origin
of the Soul,</q> in which he supported the theory of Generationism in
opposition to the Catholic doctrine of creationism, and other works
were placed in the Index, asked for a revision on the ground that he
taught nothing contrary to Catholic doctrine. He was stripped of all
his clerical functions, and students were prohibited attending his
lectures. He protested, and his rooms were more crowded than ever.
Subsequently, however, repudiated even by the Old Catholics, he
drifted more and more, not only from the church, but even from belief
in revelation. Against Strauss' last work he wrote a tract in which
he sought to prove that <q>the old faith is indeed untenable,</q> but that
also <q>the new science</q> cannot take its place, that a <q>new faith</q> must
be introduced by going back to the Christianity of Christ. <emph>Michelis</emph>, a
man of wide culture in the department of natural science and philology,
as well as theology and philosophy, had in his earlier position as professor
in Paderborn, Münster, and Braunsberg, supported by word and
pen a strictly ecclesiastical tendency; but the Vatican Council made
him one of the first and most zealous leaders of the Old Catholic movement.
His most important work is his <q>Catholic Dogmatics,</q> of
1881, in which the Old Catholic conception of Christianity is represented
as the purified higher unity of the Protestant and Vatican
systems of doctrine.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>The Chief Representatives of Historical Theology.</emph>&mdash;The first place
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
after Möhler and Döllinger belongs to Möhler's scholar Hefele, from
1840 professor at Tübingen and from 1869 Bishop of Rottenburg, distinguished
by the liberal spirit of his researches. His treatises on
the Honorius controversy made him one of the most dangerous opponents
of the infallibility dogma, to which, however, he at last submitted
(§ 189, 4). His most important work is the <q>History of the
Councils.</q> Hase criticised the second edition of the work, severely
but not without sufficient grounds, by saying that in it <q>the bishop
chokes the scholar.</q> <emph>Werner</emph> of Vienna is a prolific writer in the department
of the history of theological literature; while <emph>Bach</emph> of
Munich and the Dominican <emph>Denifle</emph> have written on the mediæval
mystics, the latter also on the universities of the Middle Ages.
<emph>Hergenröther</emph> of Würzburg, by his monograph on <q>Photius and the
Greek Schism,</q> written in the interests of his party, and by his
polemic against the anti-Vatican movement, and specially by his
<q>Handbook of Church History,</q> rendered such service to the papacy
and the papal church, that Leo XIII. in 1879 made him a cardinal
and librarian of the Vatican, with the task of reorganizing the
library.&mdash;Among the Old Catholics, <emph>Friedrich</emph> of Munich, besides his
historical account of the Vatican Council, had written on Wessel,
Huss, and the church history of Germany. <emph>Huber</emph> of Munich, whose
<q>Philosophy of the Church Fathers</q> of 1859 was put in the Index,
while his much more liberal work on Erigena of 1861 passed without
censure, in later years wrote an exhaustive account of the Jesuit
order and a critical reply to Strauss' <q>Old and New Faith.</q> <emph>Pichler</emph>
of Munich, by his conscientious research and criticism, drew down
upon him the papal censure, and his book on the <q>History of the
Division of the Eastern and Western Churches</q> had the honour of
being placed in the Index. His later studies and writings estranged
him more and more from Romanism, inspired him with the idea of a
national German church, and fostered in him a love for the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign>
movement; but his unbridled bibliomania while assistant
in the Royal Library of St. Petersburg in 1871, brought his public
career to a sad and shameful end. The Old Catholic Professor <emph>Langen</emph>
of Bonn, wrote a four-volume work against the Vatican dogma, discussed
the <q>Trinitarian Doctrinal Differences between the Eastern
and Western Churches,</q> in the interests of a union with the Greek
church, and published an able monograph on <q>John of Damascus,</q>
as well as a thorough and impartial <q>History of the Roman Church
down to Nicholas I.</q>, two vols., 1881, 1885.&mdash;In Rome the Oratorian
<emph>Aug. Theiner</emph> atoned for the literary errors of his youth (<ref target='Section_187_Para_4'>§ 187, 4</ref>) by
his zealous vindication of papal privileges. His chief works were the
continuation of the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Annales Ecclesiastici</foreign></q> of Baronius, and the editing
of the historical documents of the various Christian nations. The
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
Jesuits charged him with giving the anti-Vaticanists aid from the
library and sought to influence the pope against him so as to deprive
him of his office of prefect of the Vatican archives. He was suspended
from his duties, and though he still retained his title and
occupied his official residence in the Vatican, the doors from it
into the library were built up. His edition of the <q>Acts of the
Council of Trent,</q> which was commenced, was also prohibited. But
he succeeded in making a transcript at Agram in Croatia, where in
1874 a portion of it, the official protocol of the secretary of the Council,
Massarelli, was printed by the help of Bishop Strossmayer in an
elegant style but abbreviated, and therefore unsatisfactory. Cardinal
Angelo <emph>Mai</emph>, as principal Vatican librarian, distinguished himself by
his palimpsest studies in old classical as well as patristic literature.
And quite worthy of ranking with either in carefulness, diligence, and
patience was <emph>De Rossi</emph>, who has laboured in the department of Christian
archæology, and is well known by his great work, <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Roma sotteranea
cristiana</foreign>,</q> published in 1864 ff.&mdash;<emph>Xavier Kraus</emph>, when his <q>Handbook</q>
had been adversely criticised, hastened to Rome, submitted all his
utterances to the judgment of the pope, and proclaimed on his return
that in the next edition he would explain what had been misunderstood
and withdraw what was objected to. The question now rises,
whether the more recent work of <emph>Xav. Funk</emph> can escape a similar
censure.
</p>

<p>
Among Catholic writers on canon lay the most notable are <emph>Walters</emph>
of Bonn, <emph>Phillips</emph> of Vienna, <emph>Von Schulte</emph> of Prague and Bonn, who till
the Vatican Council was one of the most zealous advocates of the
strict Catholic tendency, since then openly on the side of the opposition,
a keen supporter, and by word and pen a vigorous promoter, of
the Old Catholic movement, and <emph>Vering</emph> of Prague, who occupies the
ultramontane Vatican standpoint.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>The Chief Representatives of Exegetical Theology.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Hug</emph> of Freiburg,
in his <q>Introduction,</q> occupies the biblical but ecclesiastically
latitudinarian attitude of Jahn. Leaving dogma unattacked and so
himself unattacked, <emph>Mövers</emph> of Breslau, best known by his work on the
Phœnicians, a Richard Simon of his age, developed a subtlety of destructive
criticism of the canon and history of the Old Testament
which astonished even the father of Protestant criticism, De Wette.
<emph>Kaulen</emph> of Bonn wrote an <q>Introduction to the Old and New Testament,</q>
in a fairly scientific spirit from the Vatican standpoint; while
<emph>Maier</emph> of Freiburg, wrote an introduction to the New Testament and
commentaries on some New Testament books.&mdash;The Old Catholic <emph>Reusch</emph>
of Bonn wrote <q>Introduction to the Old Testament,</q> and <q>Nature
and the Bible</q> (2 vols., Edin., 1886). <emph>Sepp</emph> of Munich, silent since
1867, began his literary career with a <q>Life of Christ,</q> a <q>History of
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
the Apostles,</q> etc., in the spirit of the romantic mystical school of
Görres. His <q>Sketch of Church Reform, beginning with a Revision
of the Bible Canon,</q> caused considerable excitement. With humble
submission to the judgment of his church, he demanded a correction
of the Tridentine decrees on Scripture in accordance with the results
of modern science, but the only response was the inclusion of his book
in the Index.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>The Chief Representatives of the New Scholasticism.</emph>&mdash;The official
and most masterly representative of this school for the whole Catholic
world was the Jesuit <emph>Perrone</emph>, 1794-1876, professor of dogmatics of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collegium Romanum</foreign>, the most widely read of the Catholic polemical
writers, but not worthy to tie the shoes of Bellarmin, Bossuet, and
Möhler. In his <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Prælectiones Theologicæ</foreign>,</q> nine vols., which has run
through thirty-six editions, without knowing a word of German, he
displayed the grossest ignorance along with unparalleled arrogance in
his treatment of Protestant doctrine, history, and personalities (<ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>§ 175,
2</ref>). The German Jesuit <emph>Kleutgen</emph> who, under Pius IX., was the oracle
of the Vatican in reference to German affairs, introduced the new
Roman scholasticism by his work <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Die Theologie der Vorzeit</foreign>,</q> into
the German episcopal seminaries, whose teachers were mostly trained
in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collegium Germanicum</foreign> at Rome. Alongside of Perrone and
Kleutgen, in the domain of morals, the Jesuit <emph>Gury</emph> holds the first
place, reproducing in his works the whole abomination of probabilism,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>reservatio mentalis</foreign>, and the old Jesuit casuistry (§ 149, 10),
with the usual lasciviousness in questions affecting the sexes. Among
theologians of this tendency in German universities we mention next
<emph>Denzinger</emph> of Würzburg, who seeks in his works <q>to lead dogmatics
back from the aberrations of modern philosophic speculations into
the paths of the old schools.</q> His zealous opposition to Güntherism
did much to secure its emphatic condemnation.
</p>

<p>
10. <emph>The Munich Congress of Catholic Scholars, 1863.</emph>&mdash;In order if
possible to heal the daily widening cleft between the scientific university
theologians and the scholastic theologians of the seminaries, and
bring about a mutual understanding and friendly co-operation between
all the theological faculties, Döllinger and his colleague Haneberg
summoned a congress at Munich, which was attended by about
a hundred Catholic scholars, mostly theologians. After high mass,
accompanied with the recitation of the Tridentine creed, the four days'
conference began with a brilliant presidential address by Döllinger
<q>On the Past and Present of Catholic Theology.</q> The liberal views
therein enunciated occasioned violent and animated debates, to which,
however, it was readily admitted as a religious duty that all scientific
discussions and investigations should yield to the dogmatic claims
of the infallible authority of the church, as thereby the true freedom
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
of science can in no way be prejudiced. A telegraphic report to the
pope drawn up in this spirit by Döllinger was responded to in a
similar manner on the same day with the apostolic blessing. But
after the proceedings <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in extenso</foreign> had become known, a papal brief was
issued which burdened the permission to hold further yearly assemblies
with such conditions as must have made them utterly fruitless.
They were indeed acquiesced in with a bad grace at the second and
last congress at Würzburg in 1864, but the whole scheme was thus
brought to an end.
</p>

<p>
11. <emph>Theological Journals.</emph>&mdash;The most severely scientific journal of this
century is the Tübingen <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Theol. Quartalschrift</foreign>, which, however, since
the Vatican Council has been struggling to maintain a neutral position
between the extremes of the Old and the New Catholicism. In
order if possible to displace it the Jesuits Wieser and Stenstrup
of Innsbruck started in 1877 their <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Kath. Theologie</foreign>.
The ably conducted <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Theol. Litteraturblatt</foreign>, started in 1866 by Prof.
Reusch of Bonn, had to be abandoned in 1878, after raising the standard
of Old Catholicism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_191_Para_12'/>
12. <emph>The Popes and Theological Science.</emph>&mdash;What kind of theology <emph>Pius
IX.</emph> wished to have taught is shown by his proclaiming St. Liguori
(<ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>§ 165, 2</ref>) and St. Francis de Sales (<ref target='Section_157_Para_1'>§ 157, 1</ref>) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>doctores ecclesiæ</foreign>. <emph>Leo
XIII.</emph>, on the other hand, in 1879 recommended in the encyclical
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Æterni patris</foreign>, in the most urgent way, all Catholic schools to make
the philosophy of the angelical Aquinas (§ 103, 6) their foundation,
founded in 1880 an <q>Academy of St. Thomas Aquinas,</q> three out of
its thirty members being Germans, Kleutgen, Stöckl, and Morgott, and
gave 300,000 lire out of Peter's pence for an edition of Aquinas' works
with the commentaries of <q>the most eminent expositors,</q> setting aside
<q>all those books which, while professing to be derived from St. Thomas
are really drawn from foreign and unholy sources;</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in accordance
with the desires of the Jesuits, omitting the strictly Thomist
expositors (§ 149, 13), and giving currency only to Jesuit interpretations.
No wonder that the Jesuit General Beckx in such circumstances
submitted himself <q>humbly,</q> being praised for this by the
pope as a saint. But a much greater, indeed a really great, service to
the documentary examination of the history of the Christian church
and state has been rendered by the same pope, undoubtedly at the
instigation of Cardinal Hergenröther, by the access granted not only
to Catholic but also to Protestant investigators to the exceedingly
rich treasures of the Vatican archives. Though still hedged round
with considerable limitations, the concession seems liberality itself
as compared with the stubborn refusal of Pius IX. to facilitate the
studies of any inquirer. With honest pride the pope could inscribe
on his bust placed in the library: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Leo XIII. Pont. Max. historiæ
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
studiis consulens tabularii arcana reclusit a 1880.</foreign></q>&mdash;But what the ends
were which he had in view and what the hopes that he cherished
is seen from the rescript of August, 1883, in which he calls upon
the cardinals De Luca, Pitra, and Hergenröther, as prefects of the
committee of studies, of the library and archives, while proclaiming
the great benefits which the papacy has secured to Italy, to do their
utmost to overthrow <q>the lies uttered by the sects</q> on the history of
the church, especially in reference to the papacy, for, he adds, <q>we
desire that at last once more the truth should prevail.</q> Therefore
archives and library are to be opened to pious and learned students
<q>for the service of religion and science in order that the historical
untruths of the enemies of the church which have found entrance
even into the schoolbooks should be displaced by the composition of
good writings.</q> The firstfruits of the zeal thus stimulated were the
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Monunenta ref. Lutheranæ ex tabulariis S. Sedis</foreign>,</q> Ratisbon, 1883,
published by the assistant keeper of the archives P. Balan as an extinguisher
to the Luther Jubilee of that year. But this performance
came so far short of the wishes and expectations of the Roman zealots
that by their influence the editor was removed from his official
position. The next attempt of this sort was the edition by Hergenröther
of the papal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Regesta</foreign> down to Leo X.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Relation of Church to the Empire and to the States.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_192'/>
<head>§ 192. The German Confederation.</head>

<p>
The Peace of Luneville of 1801 gave the deathblow to
the old German empire, by the formal cession of the left
bank of the Rhine to France, indemnifying the secular
princes who were losers by this arrangement with estates
and possessions on the right of the Rhine, taken from the
neutral free cities of the empire and the secularized ecclesiastical
principalities, institutions, monasteries, and orders.
An imperial commission sitting at Regensburg arranged
the details of these indemnifications. They were given expression
to by means of the imperial commission's decree or
recess of 1803. The dissolution of the constitution of the
German empire thus effected was still further carried out
by the Peace of Presburg of 1805, which conferred upon the
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
princes of Bavaria, Württemberg, and Baden, in league with
Napoleon, full sovereignty, and to the two first named the
rank of kings, and was completed by the founding of the
Confederation of the Rhine of 1806, in which sixteen German
princes formally severed themselves from the emperor and
empire and ranked themselves as vassals of France under
the protectorate of Napoleon. Francis II., who already in
1804 had assumed the title of Emperor of Austria as Francis
I., now that the German empire had actually ceased to exist,
renounced also the name of German emperor. The unhappy
proceedings of the Vienna Congress of the German Confederation
and its permanent representation in the Frankfort
parliament during 1814 and 1815, after Napoleon's twice
repeated defeat, led finally to the Austro-Prussian war of
1866.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_192_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Imperial Commission's Decree, 1803.</emph>&mdash;The significance of this
for church history consists not merely in the secularization of the
ecclesiastical principalities and corporations, but even still more in
the alteration caused thereby in the ecclesiastical polity of the territorial
governments. With the ecclesiastical principalities the most
powerful props of the Catholic church in Germany were lost, and
Protestantism obtained a decided ascendency in the council of the
German princes. The Catholic prelates were now simply paid servants
of the state, and thus their double connexion with the curia
and the state brought with it in later times endless entanglements
and complications. On the other hand, in states hitherto almost exclusively
Protestant, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Württemberg, Baden, Hesse, there was a
great increase of Catholic subjects, which attracted but little serious
attention when the confessional particularism in the consciousness of
the age was more unassuming and tolerant than ever it has been
before or since.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_192_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Prince-Primate of the Confederation of the Rhine.</emph>&mdash;Baron Carl
Theod. von Dalberg, distinguished for his literary culture and his
liberal patronage of art and science, was made in 1802 Elector of
Mainz and Lord High Chancellor of the German empire. When by
the recess of 1803 the territories of the electorate on the left of the
Rhine were given over to France and those on the right secularized,
the electoral rank was abolished. The same happened with respect
to the lord high chancellorship through the creation of the Rhenish
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
Confederation. Dalberg was indemnified for the former by the favour
of Napoleon by the gift of a small territory on the right of the Rhine,
and for the latter by the renewal of the prince-primacy of the Confederation
of the Rhine with a seat in the Federal council. He still
retained his episcopal office and fixed its seat at Regensburg. The
founding of a metropolitan chapter at Regensburg embracing the
whole domain of the Rhenish Confederation he did not succeed in
carrying out, and in 1813 he felt compelled to surrender also his
territorial possessions. His spiritual functions, however, as Archbishop
of Regensburg, he continued to discharge until his death in 1817.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_192_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Vienna Congress and the Concordat.</emph>&mdash;The Vienna Congress of
1814, 1815, had assigned it the difficult task of righting the sorely
disturbed political affairs of Europe and giving a new shape to the
territorial and dynastic relations. But never had an indispensably
necessary redistribution of territory been made more difficult or more
complicated by diplomatic intrigues than in Germany. Instead of
the earlier federation of states, the restoration of which proved impossible,
the federal constitution of June 8th, 1815, created under the
name of the German Confederation a union of states in which all
members of the confederation as such exercised equal sovereign rights.
Their number then amounted to thirty-eight, but in the course of
time by death or withdrawal were reduced to thirty-four. The new
distribution of territory, just as little as the Luneville Peace, took into
account confessional homogeneity of princes and territories, so that
the combination of Catholic and Protestant districts with the above
referred to consequences, occurred in a yet larger measure. But the
federal constitution secured in Article XVI. full toleration for all
Christian confessions in the countries of the confederation. The
claims of the Romish curia, which advanced from the demand for the
restoration of all ecclesiastical principalities and the return of all
impropriated churches and monasteries to their original purposes, to
the demand for the restoration of the holy Roman-German empire in
the mediæval and hierarchical sense, as well as the solemn protest
against its conclusions laid upon the table of the congress by the
papal legate Consalvi, were left quite unheeded. But also a proposal
urgently pressed by the vicar-general of the diocese of Constance,
Baron von Wessenberg (<ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>§ 187, 3</ref>), to found a German Catholic national
church under a German primate found no favour with the congress;
and an article recommended by Austria and Prussia to be incorporated
in the acts of the confederation by which the Catholic church in Germany
endeavoured to secure a common constitution under guarantee
of the confederation, was rejected through the opposition of Bavaria.
And since in the Frankfort parliament neither Wessenberg with his
primacy and national church idea nor Consalvi with a comprehensive
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
concordat answering to the wishes of the curia, was able to carry
through a measure, it was left to the separate states interested to make
separate concordats with the pope. Bavaria concluded a concordat in
1817 (<ref target='Section_195_Para_1'>§ 195, 1</ref>); Prussia in 1821 (<ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>§ 193, 1</ref>). Negotiations with the
other German states fell through owing to the excessiveness of the
demands of the hierarchy, or led to very unsatisfactory results, as in
Hanover in 1824 (<ref target='Section_194_Para_1'>§ 194, 1</ref>) and the states belonging to the ecclesiastical
province of the Upper Rhine in 1837 (<ref target='Section_196_Para_1'>§ 196, 1</ref>). In the time of reaction
against the revolutionary excesses of 1848 the curia first secured
any real advance. Hesse-Darmstadt opened the list in 1854 with a
secret convention (<ref target='Section_196_Para_4'>§ 196, 4</ref>); then Austria followed in 1855 with a
model concordat (<ref target='Section_198_Para_2'>§ 198, 2</ref>) which served as the pattern for the concordats
with Württemberg in 1857 (<ref target='Section_196_Para_6'>§ 196, 6</ref>), and with Baden in 1859
(<ref target='Section_196_Para_2'>§ 196, 2</ref>), as well as for the episcopal convention with Nassau in 1861
(<ref target='Section_196_Para_4'>§ 196, 4</ref>). But the revived liberal current of 1860 swept away the
South German concordats; the Vatican Council by its infallibility
dogma gave the deathblow to that of Austria, and the German
<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign></q> sent the Prussian concordat to the winds, and only
that of Bavaria remained in full force.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_192_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Frankfort Parliament and the Würzburg Bishops' Congress of
1848.</emph>&mdash;As in the March diets of 1848 the magic word <q>freedom</q>
roused through Germany a feverish excitement, it found a ready
response among the Catholics, whose church was favoured in the
highest degree by the movement. In the Frankfort parliament the
ablest leaders of Catholic Germany had seats. Among the Catholic
population there were numerous religio-political societies formed (<ref target='Section_186_Para_3'>§ 186, 3</ref>),
and the German bishops, avowedly for the celebration of the
600th anniversary of the building of Cologne cathedral, set alongside
of the Frankfort people's parliament a German bishops' council. After
they had at Frankfort declared themselves in favour of unconditional
liberty of faith, conscience, and worship, the complete independence
of all religious societies in the ordering and administering of their
affairs, but also of freeing the schools from all ecclesiastical control
and oversight, as well as of the introduction of obligatory civil marriage,
the bishops' council met in October at Würzburg under the
presidency of Archbishop Geissel of Cologne with nineteen episcopal
assistants and several able theological advisers. In thirty-six sessions
they reached the conclusion that complete separation between church
and state is not to be desired so long as the state does not refuse to the
church the place of authority belonging to it. On the other hand, by
all means in their power they are to seek the abrogation of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign>
of the sovereign, the full independence of ecclesiastical legislation,
administration and jurisdiction, with the abolition of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>appellatio
tanquam ab abusu</foreign>, the direction and oversight of the public schools as
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
well as the control of religious instruction in higher schools to be
given only by teachers licensed for the purpose by the bishops, and
finally to demand permission to erect educational institutions of their
own of every kind, etc., and to forward a copy of these decisions to all
German governments. The main object of the Würzburg assembly
to secure currency for their resolutions in the new Germany sketched
out at the Frankfort parliament, was indeed frustrated by that
parliament's speedy overthrow. Nevertheless in the several states
concerned it proved of great and lasting importance in determining
the subsequent unanimous proceedings of the bishops.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_193'/>
<head>§ 193. Prussia.</head>

<p>
To the pious king Frederick William III. (1797-1840) it
was a matter of heart and conscience to turn to account the
religious consciousness of his people, re-awakened by God's
gracious help during the war of independence, for the healing
of the three hundred years' rent in the evangelical
church by a union of the two evangelical confessions. The
jubilee festival of the Reformation in 1817 seemed to him
to offer the most favourable occasion. The king also desired
to see the Catholic church in his dominions restored to an
orderly and thriving condition, and for this end concluded
a concordat with Rome in 1821. But it was broken up in
1836 over a strife between canon and civil law in reference
to mixed marriages. Frederick William IV. was dominated
by romantic ideas, and his reign (1840-1858), notwithstanding
all his evangelical Christian decidedness, was wanting
in the necessary firmness and energetic consistency. In
the Catholic church the Jesuits were allowed unhindered to
foster ultramontane hierarchical principles, and in the evangelical
church the troubles about constitution, union, and
confession could not be surmounted either by its own proper
guardian, the episcopate, or by the superior church councils
created in 1850. And although the notifications of William
I. on his entrance upon the sole government in 1858 were
hailed by the liberals as giving assurance that a new era
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
had dawned in the development of the evangelical national
church, this hope proved to be premature. With the exaltation
of the victory-crowned royal house of Prussia to the
throne of the newly erected German Empire on January
18th, 1871, a new era was actually opened for ecclesiastical
developments and modifications throughout the land.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_193_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Catholic Church to the Close of the Cologne Conflict.</emph>&mdash;The
government of <emph>Frederick William III.</emph> entered into negotiations with
the papal curia, not so much for the old provinces in which everything
was going well, but rather in the interests of the Rhine provinces
annexed in 1814, whose bishops' sees were vacant or in need of
circumscription. The first Prussian ambassador to the Roman curia
(1816-1823) was the famous historian Niebuhr. Although a true
Protestant and keen critic and restorer of the history of old pagan
Rome he was no match for the subtle and skilful diplomacy of Consalvi.
In presence of the claims of the curia he manifested to an
almost incredible extent trustful sympathy and acquiescence, even
taking to do with matters that lay outside of Prussian affairs, eagerly
silencing and opposing any considerations suggested from the other
side. A complete concordat, however, defining in detail all the relations
between church and state was not secured, but in 1821 an agreement
was come to, with thankful acknowledgment of the <q>great
magnanimity and goodness</q> shown by the king, by the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De salute
animarum</foreign>, sanctioned by the king through a cabinet order (<q>in the
exercise of his royal prerogative and without detriment to these
rights</q>), according to which two archbishoprics, Cologne and Posen,
and six bishoprics, Treves, Münster, Paderborn, Breslau, Kulm, and
Ermeland, with a clerical seminary, were erected in Prussia and furnished
with rich endowments. The cathedral chapter was to have the
free choice of the bishop; but by an annexed note it was recommended
to make sure in every such election that the one so chosen would be a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>grata persona</foreign> to the king. The union thus effected between church
and state was of but short duration. The decree of Trent forbade
Catholics to enter into mixed marriages with non-Catholics. A later
papal bull of 1741, however, permitted it on condition of an only
passive assistance of the clergy at the wedding and an engagement by
the parents to train up the children as Catholics. The law of Prussia,
on the other hand, in contested cases made all the children follow the
religion of their fathers. As this was held in 1825 to apply to the
Rhine provinces, and as the bishops there had, in 1828, appealed to
the pope, Pius VIII. when negotiations with the Prussian ambassador
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
Bunsen (1824-1838) proved fruitless, issued in 1830 a brief which
permitted Catholic priests to give the ecclesiastical sanction to mixed
marriages only when a promise was given that the children should be
educated as Catholics, but otherwise to give only passive assistance.
When all remonstrances failed to overcome the obstinacy of the curia,
the government turned to the Archbishop of Cologne, Count Spiegel, a
zealous friend and promoter of the Hermesian theology (<ref target='Section_191_Para_1'>§ 191, 1</ref>), and
arranged in 1834 a secret convention with him, which by his influence
all his suffragans joined. In it they promised to give such an interpretation
to the brief that its observance would be limited to teaching
and exhortation, but would by no means extend to the obligation of
submitting the children to Catholic baptism, and that the mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>assistentia
passiva</foreign> would be resorted to as rarely as possible, and only in
cases where absolutely required. Spiegel died in November, 1835. In
1836 the Westphalian Baron <emph>Clement Droste von Vischering</emph> was chosen
as his successor. Although before his elevation he had unhesitatingly
agreed to the convention, soon after his enthronization he strictly
forbad all the clergy celebrating any marriage except in accordance
with the brief, and blamed himself for having believed the agreement
between convention and brief affirmed by the government, and having
only subsequently on closer examination discovered the disagreement
between the two. At the same time, in order to give effect to the
condemnation that had been meanwhile passed on the Hermesian
theology, he gave orders that at the confessional the Bonn students
should be forbidden to attend the lectures of Hermesians. When the
archbishop could not be prevailed on to yield, he was condemned in
1837 as having broken his word and having incited to rebellion, and
sent to the fortress of Minden. <emph>Gregory XIV.</emph> addressed to the consistory
a fulminating allocution, and a flood of controversial tracts on
either side swept over Germany. Görres designated the archbishop
<q>the Athanasius of the nineteenth century.</q> The government issued
a state paper justifying its procedure, and the courts of law sentenced
certain refractory priests to several years' confinement in fortresses or
prisons. The moderate peaceful tone of the cathedral chapter did
much to quell the disturbance, supporting as it did the state rather
than the archbishop. The example of Cologne encouraged also <emph>Dunin</emph>,
Archbishop of Gnesen and Posen, to issue in 1838 a pastoral in which
he threatened with suspension any priest in his diocese who would not
yield unconditional obedience to the papal brief. For this he was
deposed by the civil courts and sentenced to half a year's imprisonment
in a fortress, but the king prevented the execution of the sentence.
But Dunin fled from Berlin, whither he had been ordered by
the king, to Posen, and was then brought in 1839 to the fortress of
Kolberg. While matters were in this state <emph>Frederick William IV.</emph>
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
came to the throne in 1840. Dunin was immediately restored, after
promising to maintain the peace. Droste also was released from his
confinement with public marks of respect, but received in 1841, with
his own and the pope's approval, in the former Bishop of Spires,
Geissel, a coadjutor, who in his name and with the right of succession
administered the diocese. The government gave no aid to the Hermesians.
The law in regard to mixed marriages continued indeed in
force, but was exercised so as to put no constraint of conscience upon
the Catholic clergy. Of his own accord the king declined further
exercise of the royal prerogative, allowing the bishops direct intercourse
with the papal see, whereas previously all correspondence had
to pass through royal committees, with this proviso by the minister
Eichhorn, <q>that this display of generous confidence be not abused,</q>
and with the expectation that the bishops would not only communicate
to the government the contents of their correspondence with the pope,
but also the papal replies which did not deal exclusively with doctrine,
and would not speak and act against the wish and will of the government.
But Geissel, recommended by Louis of Bavaria to his son-in-law
Frederick William IV. instead of Baron von Diepenbrock (<ref target='Section_187_Para_1'>§ 187, 1</ref>)
who was first thought of, by his skilful and energetic manœuvring,
going on from victory to victory, raised ultramontanism in Prussia to
the very summit of its influence and glory.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_193_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Golden Age of Prussian Ultramontanism, 1841-1871.</emph>&mdash;In the
Cologne-Posen conflict Rome had won an almost complete victory, and
with all its satellites now thought only of how it might in the best
possible manner turn this victory to account, in which the all too
trustful government sought to aid it to the utmost. This movement
received a further impulse in the revolution of 1848 (<ref target='Section_192_Para_4'>§ 192, 4</ref>). In
Prussia as well as in other German lands, and there in a special
degree, the Catholic church managed to derive from the revolutionary
movements of those times, and from the subsequent reaction, substantial
advantage. The constitution of 1850 declared in Article xv.:
<q>The evangelical and the Roman Catholic Church as well as every
other religious society regulates and administers its affairs independently</q>;
in Article xvi.: <q>The correspondence of religious societies
with their superiors is unrestricted, the publication of ecclesiastical
ordinances is subject only to those limitations which apply to all other
documents</q>; in Article xviii.: <q>The right of nomination, proposal,
election, and institution to spiritual office, so far as it belongs to the
state, is abolished</q>; and in Article xxiv.: <q>The respective religious
societies direct religious instruction in the public schools.</q> Under
the screen of these fundamental privileges the Catholic episcopate now
claimed one civil prerogative after another, emancipated itself wholly
from the laws of the state, and, on the plea that God must be obeyed
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
rather than man, made the canon law, not only in purely ecclesiastical
but also in mixed matters, the only standard, and the decision of the
pope the final appeal. At last nothing was left to the state but the
obligation of conferring splendid endowments upon the bishops,
cathedral chapters, and seminaries for priests, and the honour of being
at home the executioner of episcopal tyranny, and abroad the avenger
of every utterance unfavourable in the doctrine and worship, customs
and enactments of the Catholic church. With almost incredible infatuation
the Catholic hierarchy was now regarded as a main support
of the throne against the revolutionary tendencies of the age and as
the surest guarantee for the loyalty of subjects in provinces predominantly
Catholic. Under protection of the law allowing the
formation of societies and the right of assembling, the order of Jesuits
set up one establishment after another, and made up for defects or
insufficient energy of ultramontane pastoral work, agitation and
endeavour at conversion on the part of other peaceably disposed parish
priests, by numerous missions conducted in the most ostentatious
manner (<ref target='Section_186_Para_6'>§ 186, 6</ref>). Although according to Article xiii. of the constitution
religious societies could obtain corporative rights only by
special enactments, the bishops, on their own authority, without regarding
this provision, established religious orders and congregations
wherever they chose. As these were generally placed under foreign
superiors male or female, to whom in Jesuit fashion unconditional
obedience was rendered, each member being <q>like a corpse,</q> without
any individual will, they spread without hindrance, so that continually
new cloisters and houses of the orders sprang up like mushrooms
over the Protestant metropolis (<ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>§ 186, 2</ref>). Education in Catholic
districts fell more and more into the hands of religious corporations,
and even the higher state educational institutions, so far as they dealt
with the training of the Catholic youth (theological faculties,
gymnasia, and Training schools), were wholly under the control of
the bishops. From the boys' convents and priests' seminaries, erected
at all episcopal residences, went forth a new generation of clergy
reared in the severest school of intolerance, who, first of all acting as
chaplains, by espionage, the arousing of suspicion and talebearing, were
the dread of the old parish priests, and, as <q>chaplains at large,</q> stirred
up fanaticism among the people, and secured the Catholic press to
themselves as a monopoly. For the purposes of Catholic worship and
education the government had placed state aid most liberally at their
disposal, without requiring any account from the bishops as to their
disposal of the money. Although the number of Catholics in the
whole country was only about half that of the Protestants, the endowment
of the Catholic was almost double that of the evangelical church.
The civil authority readily helped the bishops to enforce any spiritual
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
penalties, and thus the inferior clergy were brought into absolute
dependence upon their spiritual superiors. In the government department
of Public Worship, from 1840 to 1848 under the direction of
Eichhorn, there was since 1841 a subsection for dealing with the affairs
of the Catholic church which, although restricted to the guarding of
the rights of the king over against the curia and that of the state
over against the hierarchy, came to be in an entirely opposite sense
<q>the civil department of the pope in Prussia.</q> Under Von Mühler's
ministry, 1862-1872, it obtained absolute authority which it seems to
have exercised in removing unfavourable acts and documents from
the imperial archives. And thus the Catholic church, or rather the
ultramontane party dominant in it since 1848, grew up into a power
that threatened the whole commonwealth in its very foundations.&mdash;By
the annexation of Hanover, Hesse, and Nassau in 1866, four new
bishoprics, those of Hildesheim, Osnabrück, Fulda and Limburg were
added to the previous eight.&mdash;Continuation <ref target='Section_197'>§ 197</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_193_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Evangelical Church in Old Prussia down to 1848.</emph>&mdash;On the
accomplishment of the union by Frederick William III. and the
confusions arising therefrom, see <ref target='Section_177'>§ 177</ref>. <emph>Frederick William IV.</emph> on his
accession declared his wish in reference to the national evangelical
church, that the supreme control of the church should be exercised
only in order to secure for it in an orderly and legal way the independent
administration of its own affairs. The realization of this
idea, after a church conference of the ordinary clergy from almost all
German states had been held in Berlin without result, was attempted
at Berlin by a general synod, opened on Whitsunday, 1846. The
synod at its eighteenth session entered upon the consideration of the
difficult question of doctrine and the confession. The result of this
was the approval of an ordination formula drawn up by Dr. Nitzsch
(<ref target='Section_182_Para_10'>§ 182, 10</ref>), according to which the candidate for ordination was to
make profession of the great fundamental and saving truths instead
of the church confession hitherto enforced. And since among these
fundamental truths the doctrines of creation, original sin, the supernatural
conception, the descent into hell and the ascension of Christ,
the resurrection of the body, the last judgment, everlasting life and
everlasting punishment were not included, and therefore were not to
be enforced, since further by this ordination formula the special confessions
of Lutheran and Reformed were really set aside, and therewith
the existence of a Lutheran as well as a Reformed church within the
union seemed to be abolished, a small number of decided Lutherans
in the synod protested; still more decided and vigorous protests
arose from outside the synod, to which the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Evang. Kirchenzeitung</foreign>
opened its columns. The government gave no further countenance to
the decisions of the synod, and opponents exercised their wit upon
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
the unfortunate <foreign rend='italic'>Nicænum</foreign> of the nineteenth century, which as a
<foreign rend='italic'>Nitzschenum</foreign> had fallen into the water. In March, 1847, the king
issued a patent of toleration, by which protection was assured anew
to existing churches, but the formation of new religious societies was
allowed to all who found not in these the expression of their belief.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_193_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Evangelical Church in Old Prussia, 1848-1872.</emph>&mdash;When the
storms of revolution broke out in 1848, the new minister of worship,
<emph>Count Schwerin</emph>, willingly aided in reorganizing the church according
to the mind of the masses of the people by a constitutional synod.
But before it had met the reaction had already set in. The transition
ministry of <emph>Ladenberg</emph> was assured by consistories and faculties of the
danger of convoking such a synod of representatives of the people.
Instead of the synod therefore a <emph>Supreme Church Council</emph> was assembled
at Berlin in 1850, which, independent of the ministry, and only under
the king as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>præcipuum membrum ecclesiæ</foreign>, should represent the freedom
of the church from the state as something already realized. On
March 6th, 1852, the king issued a cabinet order, in consequence of
which the Supreme Church Council administered not only the affairs
of the evangelical national church as a whole, but also was charged
with the interests of the Lutheran as well as the Reformed church in
particular, and was to be composed of members from both of those
confessions, who should alone have to decide on questions referring to
their own confession. On the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Itio in partes</foreign> thus required in this
board, only Dr. Nitzsch remained over, as he declared that he could
find expression for his religious convictions in neither of the two confessions,
but only in a consensus of both. The difficulty was overcome
by reckoning him a representative equally of both denominations.
Encouraged by such connivance in high places to entertain
still bolder hopes, the Lutheran societies in 1853 presented to the
king a petition signed by one hundred and sixty one clergymen, for
restoring Lutheran faculties and the Lutheran church property. But
this called forth a rather unfavourable cabinet order, in which the
king expressed his disapproval of such a misconception of the ordinances
of the former year, and made the express declaration that it
never was his intention to break up or weaken the union effected by
his father, that he only wished to give the confession within the
union the protection to which it was undoubtedly entitled. After
this the separate Lutheran interest so long highly favoured fell into
manifest and growing disfavour. Still the ministerial department of
worship under <emph>Von Raumer</emph>, 1850-1858, continued to conduct the affairs
of schools and universities in the spirit of the ecclesiastical orthodox
reaction, and issued the endless school regulations conceived in this
spirit of the privy councillor Stiehl. The Supreme Church Council
also exhibited a rare activity and passed many wholesome ordinances.
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
The evangelical church won great credit by the care it took of its
members scattered over distant lands, in supplying them with clergy
and teachers. The evident favour with which Frederick William IV.
furthered the efforts of the Evangelical Alliance of 1857 (<ref target='Section_178_Para_3'>§ 178, 3</ref>) was
the last proof of decided aversion from the confessional movement
which he was to be allowed to give. A long and hopeless illness, of
which he died in 1861, obliged him to resign the government to his
brother <emph>William I</emph>. When this monarch in October, 1855, began to
rule in his own name, he declared to his newly appointed ministers
that it was his firm resolve that the evangelical union, whose beneficent
development had been obstructive to an orthodoxy incompatible
with the character of the evangelical church, and which had
thus almost caused its ruin, should be maintained and further advanced.
But in order that the task might be accomplished, the
organs for its administration must be carefully chosen and to some
extent changed. All hypocrisy and formalism, which that orthodoxy
had fostered, is wherever possible to be removed. The <q>new era,</q>
however, marked by the appearance of liberal journals, by no means
answered to the expectations which those words excited. The ministry
of <emph>Von Bethmann-Hollweg</emph>, 1858-1862, filled some theological and
spiritual offices in this liberal spirit; Stahl withdrew from the Supreme
Church Council; the proceedings against the free churches, as well
as the severe measures against the re-marriage of divorced parties,
were relaxed. But the marriage law laid down by the ministry with
permission of civil marriage was rejected by the House of Peers, and
the hated school regulations had to be undertaken by the minister
himself. The ecclesiastically conservative ministry of <emph>Von Mühler</emph>, 1862-1872,
which, however, wanted a fixed principle as well as self-determined
energy of will, and was therefore often vacillating and losing
the respect of all parties, was utterly unfit to realize these expectations.
The Supreme Church Council published in 1867 the outlines of
a provincial synodal constitution for the six East Provinces which
were still without this institution, which the Rhine Provinces and
Westphalia had enjoyed since 1835. For this purpose he convened
in autumn, 1869, an extraordinary provincial synod, which essentially
approved the sketch submitted, whereupon it was provisionally
enacted.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_193_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Evangelical Church in Old Prussia, 1872-1880.</emph>&mdash;After the removal
of Von Mühler, the minister of worship, in January, 1872, his
place was taken by <emph>Dr. Falk</emph>, 1872-1879. The hated school regulations
were now at last set aside and replaced by new moderate prescriptions,
conceived in an almost unexpectedly temperate spirit. On September
10th, 1873, the king issued a congregational and synodal constitution
for the eastern provinces, with the express statement that the position
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
of the confession and the union should thereby be in no way affected.
It prescribed that in every congregation presided over by a pastor,
elected by the ecclesiastically qualified church members, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> those of
honourable life who had taken part in public worship and received
the sacraments, there should be a church council of from four to
twelve persons, and for more important matters, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the election of a
pastor, a congregational committee of three times the size, half of
which should be reappointed every third year. To the district synod,
presided over by the superintendent, each congregation sends as delegates
besides the pastor a lay representative chosen by the church
council from among its members or from the congregational committee.
According to the same principle the District Synods choose
from their members a clerical and a lay representative to the provincial
synod, to which also the evangelical theological faculty of
the university within the bounds sends a deputy, and the territorial
lord nominates a number of members not exceeding a sixth part
of the whole. The general synod, in which also the two western
provinces, the Rhenish and Westphalian, take part, consists of one
hundred and fifty delegates from the provincial synods, and thirty
nominated by the territorial lords, to which the faculties of theology
and law of the six universities within the bounds send each one of their
members. Although this royal decree had proclaimed itself final,
and only remitted to an <emph>Extraordinary General Synod</emph> to be called
forthwith the task of arranging for future ordinary general synods,
yet at the meeting of this extraordinary synod in Berlin, on November
24th, 1875, a draft was submitted of a constitution modified in
various important points. Of the three demands of the liberal party
now violently insisted upon&mdash;(1) Substitution of the <q>filter</q> system
in the election of provincial and general synod members for that of
the community electorate. (2) Strengthening of the lay element in all
synods; and (3) Abolition of the equality of small village communities
with large town communities&mdash;the first was by far the most important
and serious in its consequences, but the other two bore fruit
through the decree that two-thirds of the members of the district and
provincial synods should be laymen, and the other one-third should
be freely elected to the district synod from the populous town communities,
for the provincial synods from the larger district synods.
Also in reference to the rights belonging to the several grades of
synods, considerable modifications were made, whereby the privileges
of communities were variously increased (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> to them was given the
right of refusing to introduce the catechisms and hymn-books sanctioned
by the provincial synods), while those of the district and
provincial synods were lessened in favour of the general synod, and
those of the latter again in favour of the high church council and
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
the minister of public worship. After nearly four weeks' discussion
the bill without any serious amendments was passed by the
assembly, and on January 20th, 1876, received the royal assent and
became an ecclesiastical law. But in order to give it also the rank of
a law of the state, a decision of the States' Parliament on the relation
of church and state was necessary. The parliament had already in
1874, when the original congregational and synodal constitution was
submitted to it, in order to advance the movement, approved only the
congregational constitution with provisional refusal of everything
going beyond that. In May, 1876, the bill already raised by the king
into an ecclesiastical law, passed both houses of parliament, and had
here also some amendments introduced with the effect of increasing
and strengthening the prerogative of the state. The main points in
the law as then passed are these: The general synod, whose members
undertake to fulfil their duties agreeably to the word of God and the
ordinances of the evangelical national church, has the task of maintaining
and advancing the state church on the basis of the evangelical
confession. The laws of the state church must receive its assent, but
any measure agreed upon by it cannot be laid before the king for his
sanction without the approval of the minister of public worship. It
meets every sixth year; in the interval it, as well as the provincial
synods, is represented by a synodal committee chosen from its members.
The head of the church government is the Supreme Church
Council, whose president countersigns the ecclesiastical laws approved
by the king. The right of appointing to this office lies with the
minister of public worship; in the nomination of other members the
president makes proposals with consent of the minister. Taxation of
the general synod for parliamentary purposes needs the assent of the
minister of state, and must, if it exceeds four per cent. of the class
and income tax, be agreed to by the Lower House, which also annually
has to determine the expenditure on ecclesiastical administration.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_193_Para_6'/>
6. When preparations were being made for the extraordinary
general synod, the king had repeatedly given vigorous expression to
his positive religious standpoint, and from the proposed lists of members
for that synod submitted by the minister of public worship all
names belonging to the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign> were struck out. Still
more decidedly in 1877 did he show his disapproval in the Rhode-Hossbach
troubles (<ref target='Section_180_Para_4'>§ 180, 4</ref>), by declaring his firm belief in the
divinity of Christ, and when the then president of the Brandenburg
consistory, Hegel, tendered his resignation, owing to differences with
the liberal president of the Supreme Church Council, Hermann, the
king refused to accept it, because he could not then spare any such
men as held by the apostolic faith. In May, 1878, Hermann was at
last, after repeated solicitations, allowed to retire, Dr. Hermes, member
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
of the Supreme Church Council, was nominated his successor, and the
positive tendency of the Supreme Church Council was strengthened
by the admission of the court preachers, Kögel and Baur. His proposals
again disagreeing with the royal nominations for the provincial
synod and for the <emph>First Ordinary General Synod</emph> of autumn, 1879, led
the minister of public worship, Dr. Falk, at last, after repeated solicitation,
to accept his resignation. It was granted him in July, 1879,
and the chief president of the province of Silesia, <emph>Von Puttkamer</emph>, a
more decided adherent of the positive union party, was named as his
successor; but in June, 1881, he was made minister of the interior,
and the undersecretary of the department of public worship, <emph>Von
Gossler</emph>, was made minister. The general synod, October 10th till
November 3rd, consisted of fifty-two confessionalists, seventy-six
positive-unionists, fifty-six of the middle party or evangelical
unionist, and nine from the ranks of the left, the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign>;
three confessionalists, twelve positive-unionists, and fifteen of the
middle party were nominated by the king. The measures proposed
by the Supreme Church Council: (1) A marriage service without
reference to the preceding civil marriage, with two marriage formulæ,
the first a joint promise, the second a benediction; (2) A disciplinary
law against despisers of baptism and marriage, which threatened
such with the loss of all ecclesiastical electoral rights, and eventually
with exclusion from the Lord's supper and sponsor rights; and (3)
A law dealing with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Emeriti</foreign>, were adopted by the synod and then
approved by the king. On the other hand a series of independent
proposals conceived in the interests of the high-church party remained
in suspense. The last effected elections for the general synod
committee resulted in the appointment of three positive-unionist
members, including the president, two confessionalists, and two of
the middle party.<note place='foot'>Geffcken, <q>Church and State,</q> vol. ii. pp. 501-531. Smith, <q>The
Falk Legislation from the Political Point of View,</q> in the <emph>Theological
Review</emph> for October, 1875.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_193_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>The Evangelical Church in the Annexed Provinces.</emph>&mdash;In 1866 the
provinces of Hanover, Hesse and Schleswig-Holstein were incorporated
with the kingdom of Prussia. In these political particularism, combined
with confessional Lutheranism, suspicion of every organized
system of church government as intended to introduce Prussian
unionism, even to the extreme of open rebellion, led to violent conflicts.
The king, indeed, personally gave assurance in Cassal, Hanover
and Kiel that the position of the church confession should in
no way be endangered. <q>He will indeed support the union where it
already existed as a sacred legacy to him from his forefathers; he
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
also hopes that it may always make further progress as a witness to
the grand unity of the evangelical church; but compulsion is to be
applied to no man.</q> The consistories of these provinces were still
to continue independent of the Supreme Church Council. But the
ministerial order for the restoration of representative synodal constitution
increasingly prevailed, although the wide-spread suspicion and
individual protests against the system of church government, such as
the temporary prohibition of the Marburg consistory of the mission
festival, as avowedly used for agitation against the intended synodal
constitution, helped to intensify the bitterness of feeling. But on the
other hand many preachers by their unbecoming pulpit harangues,
and their refusal to take the oath of allegiance or service, to pray in
church for their new sovereign, and to observe the general holiday
appointed to be held in 1869 on November 10th (Luther's birthday),
etc., compelled the ecclesiastical authorities to impose fines, suspension,
penal transportation, and deposition. In the Lutheran <emph>Schleswig-Holstein</emph>
a new congregational constitution was introduced in 1869 by
the minister Von Mühler, as the basis of a future synodal constitution,
which was adopted by the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vorsynode</foreign> of Rendsburg in 1871, preserving
the confessional status laid down, without discussion. In 1878 an
advance was made by the institution of district or provostship synods,
and in February, 1880, the first General Synod was held at Rendsburg.
As in Old Prussia so also here the conservative movement proved victorious.
The laity obtained majorities in all synods, and the supremacy
of the state was secured by the subordination of the church
government under the minister of public worship.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_193_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>In Hanover</emph>, where especially Lichtenberg, president of the upper
consistory, and Uhlhorn, member of the upper consistory (since
1878 abbot of Loccum), although many Lutheran extremists long
remained dissatisfied, temperately and worthily maintained the independence
and privileges of the Lutheran church, the first national
synod could be convened and could bring to a generally peaceful conclusion
the question of the constitution only in the end of 1869, after
the preliminary labour of the national synod committee. In 1882 the
Reformed communities of 120,000 souls, hitherto subject to Lutheran
consistories, obtained an independent congregational and synodal constitution.
Against the new marriage ordinance enacted in consequence
of the civil marriage law (<ref target='Section_197_Para_5'>§ 197, 5</ref>), Theod. Harms (brother, and from
1865 successor of L. Harms, <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>§ 184, 1</ref>), pastor and director of Hermannsburg
missionary seminary, rebelled from the conviction that civil
marriage did not deserve to be recognised as marriage. He was first
suspended, then in 1877 deposed from office, and with the most of his
congregation retired and founded a separate Lutheran community,
to which subsequently fifteen other small congregations of 4,000 souls
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
were attached. As teacher and pupils of the seminary made it a
zealous propaganda for the secession, the missionary journals and
missionary festivals were misused for the same purpose, and as Harms
answered the questions of the consistory in reference thereto, partly
by denying, partly by excusing, that court, in December, 1878, forbad
the missionary collections hitherto made throughout the churches at
Epiphany for Hermannsburg, and so completely broke off the connection
between the state church and the institution which had hitherto
been regarded as <q>its pride and its preserving salt.</q> A reaction has
since set in in favour of the seminary and its friends on the assurance
that the interests of the separation would not be furthered by the
seminary, and that several other objectionable features, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the frequent
employment in the mission service of artisans without theological
training, the sending of them out in too great numbers without
sufficient endowment and salary, so that missionaries were obliged to
engage in trade speculations, should be removed as far as possible;
but since the seminary life was always still carried on upon the basis
of ecclesiastical secession, it could lead to no permanent reconciliation
with the state church. Harms died in 1885. His son Egmont was
chosen his successor, and as the consistory refused ordination, he
accepted consecration at the hands of five members of the Immanuel
Synod at Magdeburg.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_193_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>In Hesse</emph> the ministry of Von Mühler sought to bring about a
combination of the three consistories of Hanau, Cassel, and Marburg,
as a necessary vehicle for the introduction of a new synodal constitution.
In the province itself an agitation was persistently carried on
for and against the constitutional scheme submitted by the ministers,
which wholly ignored the old church order (§ 127, 2), which, though
in the beginning of the seventeenth century through the ecclesiastical
disturbances of the time (<ref target='Section_154_Para_1'>§ 154, 1</ref>), it had passed out of use, had
never been abrogated and so was still legally valid. A <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vorsynode</foreign>
convened in 1870 approved of it in all essential points, but conventions
of superintendents, pastoral conferences and lay addresses protested,
and the Prussian parliament, for which it was not yet liberal enough,
refused the necessary supplies. As these after Von Mühler's overthrow
were granted, his successor, Dr. Falk, immediately proceeded in
1873 to set up in Cassel the court that had been objected to so long.
It was constituted after the pattern of the Supreme Church Council,
of Lutheran, Reformed, and United members with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Itio in partes</foreign> on
specifically confessional questions. The clergy of Upper Hesse comforted
themselves with saying that the new courts in which the confessions
were combined, if not better, were at least no worse than the
earlier consistories in which the confessions were confounded; and
they felt obliged to yield obedience to them, so long as they did not
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
demand anything contradictory the Lutheran confession. On the
other hand, many of the clergy of Lower Hesse saw in the advance from
a merely eventual to an actual blending of the confessional status in
church government an intolerable deterioration. And so forty-five
clergyman of Lower and one of Upper Hesse laid before the king
a protest against the innovation as destructive of the confessional
rights of the Hessian church contrary to the will of the supreme
majesty of Jesus Christ. They were dismissed with sharp rebuke,
and, with the exception of four who submitted, were deposed from
office for obstinate refusal to obey. There were about sixteen congregations
which to a greater or less extent kept aloof from the new
pastors appointed by the consistories, and without breaking away
from the state church wished to remain true to the old pastor <q>appointed
by Jesus Christ himself.</q>&mdash;In autumn, 1884, the movement
on behalf of the restoration of a presbyterial and synodal constitution
of the Hessian evangelical church, which had been delayed for fourteen
years, was resumed. A sketch of a constitution, which placed it
under three general superintendents (Lutheran, Reformed, United)
and thirteen superintendents, and, for the fair co-operation of the
lay element in the administration of church affairs (the confession
status, however, being beyond discussion), provided suitable organs
in the shape of presbyteries and synods, with a predominance of
the lay element, was submitted to a <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vorsynode</foreign> that met on November
12th, consisting of two divisions, like a Lower and Upper House,
sitting together. The first division, as representative of the then
existing church order, embraced, in accordance with the practice of
the old Hessian synods, all the members of the consistory, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the
nine superintendents and thirteen pastors elected by the clergy; the
second, consisting at least of as many lay as clerical members, was
chosen by the free election of the congregation. The royal assent was
given to the decrees of the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vorsynode</foreign> in the end of December, 1885,
and the confessional status was thereby expressly guaranteed.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_194'/>
<head>§ 194. The North German smaller States.</head>

<p>
In most of the smaller North German states, owing to
the very slight representation of the Reformed church,
which was considerable only in Bremen, Lippe-Detmold,
and a part of Hesse and East Friesland, the union met
with little favour. Yet only in a few of those provinces
did a sharply marked confessional Lutheranism gain wide
and general acceptance. This was so especially and most
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
decidedly in Mecklenburg, but also in Hanover, Hesse, and
Saxony. On the other hand, since the close of 1860, in
almost all those smaller states a determined demand was
made for a representative synodal constitution, securing the
due co-operation of the lay element.&mdash;The Catholic church
was strongest in Hanover, and next come some parts of
Hesse, which had been added to the ecclesiastical province
of the Upper Rhine (<ref target='Section_196_Para_1'>§ 196, 1</ref>), but in the other North
German smaller states it was only represented here and
there.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_194_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Kingdom of Saxony.</emph>&mdash;The present kingdom of Saxony, formerly
an electoral principality, has had Catholic princes since 1679 (<ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>§ 153, 1</ref>),
but the Catholic church could strike its roots again only in the immediate
neighbourhood of the court. Indeed those belonging to it did
not enjoy civil and religious equality until 1807, when this distinction
was set aside. The erection of cloisters and the introduction of
monkish orders, however, continued even then forbidden, and all
official publications of the Catholic clergy required the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign> of the
government. The administration of the evangelical church, so long
as the king is Catholic, lies, according to agreement, in the hands of
the ministers commissioned <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in evangelicis</foreign>. Although several of these
have proved defenders of ecclesiastical orthodoxy, the rationalistic
Illumination became almost universally prevalent not only among
the clergy but also among the general populace. Meanwhile a pietistic
reaction set in, especially powerful in Muldenthal, where Rudelbach's
labours impressed on it a Lutheran ecclesiastical character.
The religious movement, on the other hand, directed by Martin
Stephan, pastor of the Bohemian church in Dresden, came to a sad
and shameful end. As representative and restorer of strict Lutheran
views he had wrought successfully in Dresden from 1810, but,
through the adulation of his followers, approaching even to worship,
he fell more and more deeply into hierarchical assumption and
neglect of self-vigilance. When the police in 1837 restricted his
nightly assemblies, without, however, having discovered anything
immoral, and suspended him from his official duties, he called upon
his followers to emigrate to America. Many of them, lay and clerical,
blindly obeyed, and founded in 1835, in Missouri, a Lutheran church
communion (<ref target='Section_208_Para_2'>§ 208, 2</ref>). Stephan's despotic hierarchical assumptions
here reached their fullest height; he also gave his lusts free scope.
Women oppressed or actually abused by him at length openly proclaimed
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
his shame in 1839, and the community excommunicated him.
He died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1846. Taught by such experiences, and purged of the
Donatist-separatist element, a church reaction against advancing
rationalism made considerable progress under a form of church that
favoured it, and secured also influential representatives in members
of the theological faculty of the university of Leipzig distinguished
for their scientific attainments. After repeated debates in the chamber
over a scheme of a new ecclesiastical and synodal order submitted by the
ministry, the first evangelical Lutheran state synod met in Dresden, in
May, 1871. On the motion of the government, the law of patronage
was here modified so that the patron had to submit three candidates to
the choice of the ecclesiastical board. It was also decided to form an
upper or state consistory, to which all ecclesiastical matters hitherto
administered by the minister of public worship should be given
over; the control of education was to remain with the ministry, and
the state consistory was to charge itself with the oversight only of
religious instruction and ethico-religious training. The most lively
debates were those excited by the proposal to abolish the obligation
resting upon all church teachers to seem to adhere to the confession
of the Lutheran church, led by Dr. Zarncke, the rector of the
state university. The commission of inquiry sent down, under the
presidency of Professor Luthardt, demanded the absolute withdrawal
of this proposal, which aimed at perfect doctrinal freedom. On the
other hand, Professor G. Baur made the mediate proposal to substitute
for the declaration on oath, the promise to teach simply and purely
to the best of his knowledge and according to conscience the gospel
of Christ as it is contained in Scripture, and witnessed in the confessions
of the Lutheran church. And as even now Luthardt, inspired
by the wish not to rend the first State Synod at its final sitting by an
incurable schism, agreed to this suggestion, it was carried by a large
majority. In consequence of this decision, a number of <q>Lutherans
faithful to the confession,</q> withdrew from the State church, and on
the anniversary of the Reformation in 1871, constituted themselves
into an Evangelical Lutheran Free Church, associated with the Missouri
synod (<ref target='Section_208_Para_2'>§ 208, 2</ref>), from which, on the suggestion of some of the members
of the community who had returned from America, they chose
for themselves a pastor called Ruhland. There were five such congregations
in Saxony: at Dresden, Planitz, Chemnitz, Frankenberg, and
Krimmitschau, to which some South German dissenters at Stenden,
Wiesbaden, Frankfort, and Anspach attached themselves.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_194_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Saxon Duchies.</emph>&mdash;The Stephan emigration had also decoyed a
number of inhabitants from Saxe-Altenburg. In a rescript to the
Ephorus Ronneburg, in 1838, the consistory traced back this separatist
movement to the fact that the religious needs of the congregations
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
found no satisfaction in the rationalistic preaching, and urged a more
earnest presentation from the pulpit of the fundamental and central
doctrines of evangelical Christianity. This rescript was the subject
of violent denunciation. The government took the opinion of four
theological faculties on the procedure of the consistory and its opponents,
who published it simply with the praise and blame contained
therein, and thus prevented any investigation. Also in <emph>Weimar</emph> and
<emph>Gotha</emph> the rationalism of Röhr and Bretschneider, which had dominated
almost all pulpits down to the middle of the century, began gradually
to disappear, and the more recent parties of Confessional, Mediation,
and Free Protestant theology to take its place. The last named party
found vigorous support in the university of Jena. A petition addressed
to it in 1882 from the Thuringian Church Conference of Eisenach, to
call to Jena also a representative of the positive Lutheran theology,
was decidedly refused, and, in a controversial pamphlet by Superintendent
Braasch, condemned as <q>the Eisenach outrage</q> (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Attentat</foreign>).
In <emph>Meiningen</emph> the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vorsynode</foreign> convened there in 1870 sanctioned the
sketch of a moderately liberal synodal constitution submitted to it,
which placed the confession indeed beyond the reach of legislative
interference, but also secured its rights to free inquiry. The first State
Synod, however, did not meet before 1878. In <emph>Weimar</emph> the first synod
was held in 1873, the second in 1879.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_194_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Kingdom of Hanover.</emph>&mdash;Although the union found no acceptance
in Hanover, after the overthrow of the rationalism of the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>ancien
régime</foreign>, the union theology became dominant in the university. The
clergy, however, were in great part carried along by the confessional
Lutheran current of the age. The Preachers' Conference at Stade in
1854 took occasion to call the attention of the government to the <q>manifest
divergence</q> between the union theology of the university and the
legal and actual Lutheran confession of the state church, and urged the
appointment of Lutheran teachers. The faculty, on the other hand,
issued a memorial in favour of liberty of public teaching, and the curators
filled the vacancies again with union theologians. When in April,
1862, it was proposed to displace the state catechism introduced in
1790, which neither theologically nor catechetically satisfied the needs
of the church, by a carefully sifted revision of the Walther catechism
in use before 1790, approved of by the Göttingen faculty, the agitation
of the liberal party called forth an opposition, especially in city
populations, which expressed itself in insults to members of consistories
and pastors, and in almost daily repeated bloody street fights with the
military, and obliged the government at last to give way.&mdash;The
negotiations about a concordat with Rome reached up further in 1824
than obtaining the circumscription bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Impensa Romanorum</foreign>, by
which the Catholic church obtained two bishoprics, those of Hildesheim
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
and Osnabrück.&mdash;In 1886, Hanover was incorporated with the kingdom
of Prussia (<ref target='Section_193_Para_8'>§ 193, 8</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_194_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Hesse.</emph>&mdash;Landgrave Maurice, 1592-1627, had forced upon his
territories a modified Melanchthonian Calvinism (<ref target='Section_154_Para_1'>§ 154, 1</ref>), but a
Lutheran basis with Lutheran modes of viewing things and Lutheran
institutions still remained, and the Lutheran reaction had never been
completely overcome, not even in Lower Hesse, although there the
name of the Reformed Church with Reformed modes of worship had
been gradually introduced in most of the congregations. The communities
of Upper Hesse and Schmalcald, however, by continuous
opposition saved for the most part their Lutheranism, which in 1648
was guaranteed to them anew by the Darmstadt Recess, and secured
an independent form of church government in the Definitorium at
Marburg. The union movement, which issued from Prussia in 1817,
met with favour also in Hesse, but only in the province of Hanau in
1818 got the length of a formal constituting of a church on the basis
of the union. In 1821, however, the elector issued the so-called Reorganization
edict, by which the entire evangelical church of the
electorate, without any reference to the confession status, but simply
in accordance with the political divisions of the state, was put under
the newly instituted consistories of Cassel, Marburg, and Hanau, in
the formation of which the confession of the inhabitants had not been
considered. The Marburg Definitorium indeed protested, but in vain,
against this despotic act, which was felt a grievance, less on account of
the wiping out of the confession than on account of the loss of independent
church government which it occasioned. The government
appointed pastors, teachers and professors without enquiring much
about their confession. In 1838 the hitherto required subscription of
the clergy to the confessional writings, the Augsburg Confession and
its Apology, was modified into a formula declaring conscientious
regard for them. But in this Bickell, professor of law at Marburg,
saw a loss to the church in legal status, an endangering of the
evangelical church; the theological professor, Hupfeld, also in the
further course of the controversy took his side, while the advocate,
Henkel, in Cassel, as a popular agitator opposed him and demanded a
State Synod for the formal abolishing of all symbolical books. The
government ignored both demands, and the vehement conflict was
quieted by degrees. With 1850 a new era began in the keen controversy
over the question, which confession, whether Lutheran or
Reformed, was legally and actually that of the state. The ministry
of Hassenpflug from 1850, which suppressed the revolution, considered
it as legally the Lutheran, and determined the ecclesiastical arrangements
in this sense, and in this course Dr. Vilmar, member of the
Consistory, was the minister's right hand. But the elector was from
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
the beginning personally opposed to this procedure, and on the overthrow
of the ministry in 1855, Vilmar (died 1868) was also transferred
to a theological professorship at Marburg. This, however, only gave
a new impulse to the confessional Lutheran movement in the state,
for the spirit and tendency of the highly revered theological teacher
powerfully influenced the younger generation of the Hessian clergy.
In consequence of the German war, Hesse was annexed to Prussia in
1866 (<ref target='Section_193_Para_9'>§ 193, 9</ref>).&mdash;On the Catholic church in this state, compare <ref target='Section_196_Para_1'>§ 196, 1</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_194_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Brunswick, Oldenburg, Anhalt, and Lippe-Detmold.</emph>&mdash;Much ado was
made also in <emph>Brunswick</emph> over the introduction of a new constitution for
the Lutheran state church in 1869, and at last in 1871 a synodal
ordinance was passed by which the State Synod, consisting of fourteen
clerical and eighteen lay members, was to meet every four years, so
as not to be a too offensive factor in the ecclesiastical administration
and legislation, which therefore has left untouched the content of
the confession. The first synod of 1872 began by rejecting the injunction
to open the sessions with prayer and reading of scripture.
<emph>Oldenburg</emph>, which in 1849, by a synod whose membership had been
chosen by the original electorate, had been favoured with a democratic
church constitution wholly separate from the state, accepted in 1854
without opposition a new constitution which restored the headship
of the church to the territorial lords, the administration of the church
to a Supreme Church Council and ecclesiastical legislation to a State
Synod consisting of clerical and lay members.&mdash;The prince in the
exercise of his sovereign rights gave a charter in 1878 to the evangelical
church of the Duchy of <emph>Anhalt</emph> to a synodal ordinance which,
though approved by the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Vorsynode</foreign> of 1876, had been rejected by
parliament, and afterwards it gained the assent of the national representatives.&mdash;In
the Reformed <emph>Lippe-Detmold</emph> there were in 1844 still
five preachers who, wearied of the illuminationist catechism of the state
church, had gone back to the Heidelberg catechism and protested
against the abolition of acceptance on oath of the symbols, as destructive
of the peace of the church. The democratic church constitution
of 1851, however, was abrogated in 1854, and instead of it, the old
Reformed church order of 1684 was again made law. At the same
time, religious pardon and equality were guaranteed to Catholics and
Lutherans. The first Reformed State Synod was constituted in 1878.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_194_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Mecklenburg.</emph>&mdash;Mecklenburg-Schwerin from 1848 was in possession
of a strictly Lutheran church government under the direction of
Kliefoth, and its university at Rostock had decidedly Lutheran theologians.
When the chamberlain Von Kettenburg, on going over to the
Catholic church, appointed a Catholic priest on his estate, the government
in 1852, on the ground that the laws of the state did not allow
Catholic services which extended beyond simple family worship, held
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
that he had overstepped the limits. A complaint, in reference thereto,
presented to the parliament and then to the German <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bund</foreign>, was in
both cases thrown out. Even in 1863 the Rostock magistrates refused
to allow tower and bells in the building of a Catholic church.&mdash;An
extraordinary excitement was caused by the removal from office in
January, 1858, of Professor M. Baumgarten of Rostock. An examination
paper set by him on 2 Kings xi. by which the endeavour was
made to win scripture sanction for a violent revolution, obliged the
government even in 1856 to remove him from the theological examination
board. At the same time his polemic addressed to a pastoral
conference at Parchim, against the doctrine of the Mecklenburg state
catechism on the ceremonial law, especially in reference to the sanctification
of the Sabbath, increased the distrust which the clergy of the
state, on account of his writings, had entertained against his theological
position as one which, from a fanatical basis, diverged on all sides into
fundamental antagonism to the confession and the ordinances of the
Lutheran state church. The government finally deposed him in 1858
(leaving him, however, in possession of his whole salary, also of the
right of public teaching), on the ground and after the publication of
a judgment of the consistory which found him guilty of heretical
alteration of all the fundamental doctrines of the Christian faith and
the Lutheran confession, and sought to prove this verdict from his
writings. As might have been foreseen, this step was followed by a
loud outcry by all journals; but even Lutherans, like Von Hofmann,
Von Scheurl, and Luthardt, objected to the proceedings of the government
as exceeding the law laid down by the ecclesiastical ordinance
and the opinion of the consistory as resting upon misunderstanding,
arbitrary supposition and inconsequent conclusion.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_195'/>
<head>§ 195. Bavaria.</head>

<p>
Catholic Bavaria, originally an electorate, but raised in
1806, by Napoleon's favour, into a royal sovereignty, to
which had been adjudged by the Vienna Congress considerable
territories in Franconia and the Palatine of the Rhine
with a mainly Protestant population, attempted under
Maximilian Joseph (IV.) I., after the manner of Napoleon,
despotically to pass a liberal system of church polity, but
found itself obliged again to yield, and under Louis I.
became again the chief retreat of Roman Catholic ecclesiasticism
of the most pronounced ultramontane pattern. It was
under the noble and upright king, Maximilian II., that the
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
evangelical church of the two divisions of the kingdom,
numbering two-thirds of the population, first succeeded in
securing the unrestricted use of their rights. Nevertheless,
Catholic Bavaria remained, or became, the unhappy scene of
the wildest demagogic agitation of the Catholic clergy and
of the Bavarian <q>Patriots</q> who played their game, whose
patriotism consisted only in mad hatred of Prussia and
fanatical ultramontanism. Yet King Louis II., after the
brilliant successes of the Franco-German war, could not
object to the proposal of November 30th, 1870, to found a
new German empire under a Prussian and therefore a
Protestant head.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_195_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Bavarian Ecclesiastical Polity under Maximilian I., 1799-1825.</emph>&mdash;Bavaria
boasted with the most unfeigned delight after the uprooting
of Protestantism in its borders as then defined (§ 151, 1), that it was
the most Catholic, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the most ultramontane and most bigoted, of
German-speaking lands, and, after a short break in this tradition by
Maximilian Joseph III. (<ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>§ 165, 10</ref>), went forth again with full sail,
under Charles Theodore, 1777-1779, on the old course. But the
thoroughly new aspect which this state assumed on the overthrow of
the old German empire, demanded an adapting territorially of the
civil and ecclesiastical life in accordance with the relations which it
owed to its present political position. The new elector Maximilian
Joseph IV., who as king styled himself Maximilian I., transferred the
execution of this task to his liberal, energetic, and thoroughly fearless
minister, Count Montgelas, 1799-1817. In January, 1802, it was
enacted that all cloisters should be suppressed, and that all cathedral
foundations should be secularized; and these enactments were immediately
carried out in an uncompromising manner. Even in 1801
the qualification of Protestants to exercise the rights of Bavarian
citizens was admitted, and a religious edict of 1803 guaranteed to
all Christian confessions full equality of civil and political privileges.
To the clergy was given the control of education, and to the gymnasia
and universities a considerable number of foreigners and Protestants
received appointments. In all respects the sovereignty of the state
over the church and the clergy was very decidedly expressed, the
episcopate at all points restricted in its jurisdiction, the training of
the clergy regulated and supervised on behalf of the state, the
patronage of all pastorates and benefices usurped by the government,
even public worship subjected to state control by the prohibition
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
of superstitious practices, etc. But amid many other infelicities of
this autocratic procedure was specially the gradual dying out of the
old race of bishops, which obliged the government to seek again
an understanding with Rome; and so it actually happened in June,
1817, after Montgelas' dismissal, that a concordat was drawn up.
By this the Roman Catholic apostolic religion secured throughout
the whole kingdom those rights and prerogatives which were due
to it according to divine appointment and canonical ordinances,
which, strictly taken, meant supremacy throughout the land. In
addition, two archbishoprics and seven bishoprics were instituted,
the restoration of several cloisters was agreed to, and the unlimited
administration of theological seminaries, the censorship of books, the
superintendance of public schools and free correspondence with the
holy see were allowed to the bishops. On the other hand, the king
was given the choice of bishops (to be confirmed by the pope), the
nomination of a great part of the priests and canons, and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign>
for all hierarchical publications. After many vain endeavours to
obtain amendments, the king at last, on October 17th, ratified this
concordat; but, to mollify his highly incensed Protestant subjects, he
delayed the publication of it till the proclamation of the new civil
constitution on May 18th following. The concordat was then adopted,
as an appendage to an edict setting forth the ecclesiastical supremacy
of the state, securing perfect freedom of conscience to all subjects,
as well as equal civil rights to members of the three Christian confessions,
and demanding from them equal mutual respect. The irreconcilableness
of this edict with the concordat was evident, and the
newly appointed bishops as well as the clerical parliamentary deputies,
declared by papal instruction that they could not take the oath to
the constitution without reservation, until the royal statement of
Tegernsee, September 21st, that the oath taken by Catholic subjects
simply referred to civil relations, and that the concordat had also the
validity of a law of the state, induced the curia to agree to it. But
the government nevertheless continued to insist as before upon the
supremacy of the state over the church, enlarged the claims of the
royal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign>, put the free intercourse with Rome again under state
control, arbitrarily disposed of church property and supervised the
theological examinations of the seminarists, made the appointment of
all clergy dependent on its approbation, and refused to be misled in
anything by the complaints and objections of the bishops.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_195_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Bavarian Ecclesiastical Polity under Louis I., 1825-1848.</emph>&mdash;Zealous
Catholic as the new king was, he still held with unabated
tenacity to the sovereign rights of the crown, and the extreme ultramontane
ministry of Von Abel from 1837 was the first to wring from
him any relaxations, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the reintroduction of free intercourse between
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
the bishops and the holy see without any state control. But it could
not obtain the abolition of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign>, and just as little the eagerly
sought permission of the return of the Jesuits. On the other hand
the allied order of Redemptorists was allowed, whose missions among
the Bavarian people, however, the king soon made dependent on a
permission to be from time to time renewed. His tolerant disposition
toward the Protestants was shown in 1830, by his refusing the demand
of the Catholic clergy for a Reverse in mixed marriages, and recognising
Protestant sponsors at Catholic baptisms. But yet his honourable
desire to be just even to the Protestants of his realm was often
paralysed, partly by his own ultramontane sympathies, partly and
mainly by the immense influence of the Abel ministry, and the
religious freedom guaranteed them by law in 1818 was reduced and
restricted. Among other things the Protestant press was on all sides
gagged by the minister, while the Catholic press and preaching
enjoyed unbridled liberty. Great as the need was in southern Bavaria
the government had strictly forbidden the taking of any aid from the
<emph>Gustavus Adolphus Verein</emph>. Louis saw even in the name of this society
a slight thrown on the German name, and was specially offended at its
vague, nearly negative attitude towards the confession. Yet he had no
hesitation in affording an asylum in Catholic Bavaria to the Lutheran
confessor Scheibel (<ref target='Section_177_Para_2'>§ 177, 2</ref>) whom Prussian diplomacy had driven out
of Lutheran Saxony, and did not prevent the university of Erlangen,
after its dead orthodoxy had been reawakened by the able Reformed
preacher Krafft (died 1845), becoming the centre of a strict Lutheran
church consciousness in life as well as science for all Germany. The
adoration order of 1838, which required even the Protestant soldiers to
kneel before the host as a military salute, occasioned great discontent
among the Protestant population, and many controversial pamphlets
appeared on both sides. When finally the parliament in 1845 took up
the complaint of the Protestants, a royal proclamation followed by
which the usually purely military salute formerly in use was restored.
In 1847 the ultramontane party, with Abel at its head, fell into disfavour
with the king, on account of its honourable attitude in the
scandal which the notorious Lola Montez caused in the circle of the
Bavarian nobility; but in 1848 Louis was obliged, through the revolutionary
storm that burst over Bavaria, to resign the crown.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_195_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Bavarian Ecclesiastical Polity under Maximilian II., 1848-1864,
and Louis II.</emph> (died 1886).&mdash;Much more thoroughly than his father did
Maximilian II. strive to act justly toward the Protestant as well as
the Catholic church, without however abating any of the claims of
constitutional supremacy on the part of the state. In consequence of
the Würzburg negotiations (<ref target='Section_192_Para_4'>§ 192, 4</ref>), the Bavarian bishops assembled
at Freysing, in November, 1850, presented a memorial, in which they
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
demanded the withdrawal of the religious edict included in the constitution
of 1818, as in all respects prejudicial to the rights of the church
granted by the concordat, and set forth in particular those points
which were most restrictive to the free and proper development of the
catholic church. The result was the publication in April, 1852, of a
rescript which, while maintaining all the principles of state administration
hitherto followed, introduced in detail various modifications,
which, on the renewal of the complaints in 1854, were somewhat
further increased as the fullest and final measure of surrender.&mdash;The
change brought about in 1866 in the relation of Bavaria to North
Germany led the government under Louis II. to introduce liberal
reforms, and the offensive and defensive alliance which the government
concluded with the heretical Prussia, the failure of all attempts
on the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian war to force it in violation of
treaty to maintain neutrality, and then to prevent Bavaria becoming
part of the new German empire founded in 1871 at the suggestion of
her own king, roused to the utmost the wrath of the Bavarian clerical
patriots. In the conflicts of the German government, in 1872, against
the intolerable assumptions, claims and popular tumults of the ultramontane
clergy, the department of public worship, led by Lutz,
inclined to take an energetic part. But this was practically limited
to the passing of the so-called <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kanzelparagraphen</foreign> (<ref target='Section_197_Para_4'>§ 197, 4</ref>) in the
<hi rend='italic'>Reichstag</hi>. Comp. <ref target='Section_197_Para_14'>§ 197, 14</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_195_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Attempts at Reorganization of the Lutheran Church.</emph>&mdash;Since 1852, Dr.
von Harless (<ref target='Section_182_Para_13'>§ 182, 13</ref>), as president of the upper consistory at Munich,
stood at the head of the Lutheran church of Bavaria. Under his
presidency the general synod at Baireuth in 1853 showed a vigorous
activity in the reorganization of the church. On the basis of its
proceedings the upper consistory ordered the introduction of an
admirable new hymnbook. This occasioned considerable disagreement.
But when, in 1856, the upper consistory issued a series of enactments
on worship and discipline, a storm, originating in Nuremberg, burst
forth in the autumn of that same year, which raged over the whole
kingdom and attacked even the state church itself. The king was
assailed with petitions, and the spiritual courts went so far in faint-heartedness
as to put the acceptance and non-acceptance of its
ordinances to the vote of the congregations. Meanwhile the time had
come for calling another general synod (1857). An order of the king
as head of the church abolished the union of the two state synods in
a general synod which had existed since 1849, and forbad all discussion
of matters of discipline. Hence instead of one, two synods
assembled, the one in October at Anspach, the other in November at
Baireuth. Both, consisting of equal numbers of lay and clerical
members, maintained a moderate attitude, relinquishing none of the
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
privileges of the church or the prerogatives of the upper consistory,
and yet contributed greatly to the assuaging of the prevalent excitement.
Also the lay and clerical members of the subsequent reunited
general synods held every fourth year for the most part co-operated
successfully on moderate church lines. The synod held at Baireuth
in 1873 unanimously rejected an address sent from Augsburg inspired
by <q>Protestant Union</q> sympathies, as to their mind <q>for the most
part indistinct and where distinct unevangelical.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_195_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Church of the Union in the Palatine of the Rhine.</emph>&mdash;In the
Bavarian <emph>Palatine of the Rhine</emph> the union had been carried out in 1818
on the understanding that the symbolical books of both confessions
should be treated with due respect, but no other standard recognised
than holy scripture. When therefore the Erlangen professor, Dr.
Rust, in 1832 appeared in the consistory at Spires and the court for
that time had endeavoured to fill up the Palatine union with positive
Christian contents, 204 clerical and lay members of the Diocesan
Synod presented to the assembly of the states of the realm, opportunely
meeting in 1837, a complaint against the majority of the consistory.
As this memorial yielded practically no result, the opposition wrought
all the more determinedly for the severance of the Palatine church
from the Munich Upper Consistory. This was first accomplished in
the revolutionary year 1848. An extraordinary general synod
brought about the separation, and gave to the country a new democratic
church constitution. But the reaction of the blow did not stop
there. The now independent consistory at Spires, from 1853 under
the leadership of Ebrard, convened in the autumn of that year a
general synod, which made the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Augustana Variata</foreign> of 1540 as representing
the consensus between the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Augustana</foreign> of 1530 and the Heidelberg
as well as the Lutheran catechism, the confessional standard of
the Palatine church, and set aside the democratic election law of 1848.
When now the consistory, purely at the instance of the general
synod of 1853, submitted to the diocesan synod in 1856 the proofs of
a new hymnbook, the liberal party poured out its bitter indignation
upon the system of doctrine which it was supposed to favour. But
the diocesan synods admitted the necessity of introducing a new
hymnbook and the suitability of the sketch submitted, recommending,
however, its further revision so that the recension of the text might
be brought up to date and that an appendix of 150 new hymns might
be added. The hymnbook thus modified was published in 1859, and
its introduction into church use left to the judgment of presbyteries,
while its use in schools and in confirmation instruction was insisted
upon forthwith. This called forth protest after protest. The government
wished from the first to support the synodal decree, but in presence of
growing disturbance, changed its attitude, recommended the consistory
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
to observe decided moderation so as to restore peace, and in February,
1861, called a general synod which, however, in consequence of the
prevailingly strict ecclesiastical tendencies of its members, again
expressed itself in favour of the new hymnbook. Its conclusions were
meanwhile very unfavourably received by the government. Ebrard
sought and obtained liberty to resign, and even at the next synod, in
1869, the consistory went hand in hand with the liberal majority.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_196'/>
<head>§ 196. The South German Smaller States and
Rhenish Alsace and Lorraine.</head>

<p>
The Protestant princely houses of South Germany had by
the Lüneville Peace obtained such an important increase of
Catholic subjects, that they had to make it their first care
to arrange their delicate relations by concluding a concordat
with the papal curia in a manner satisfactory to state and
church. But all negotiations broke down before the exorbitant
claims of Rome, until the political restoration movements
of 1850 led to modifications of them hitherto undreamed
of. The concordats concluded during this period
were not able to secure enforcement over against the liberal
current that had set in with redoubled power in 1860,
and so one thing after another was thrown overboard.
Even in the Protestant state churches this current made
itself felt in the persistent efforts, which also proved successful,
to secure the restoration of a representative synodal
constitution which would give to the lay element in the
congregations a decided influence.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_196_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Upper Rhenish Church Province.</emph>&mdash;The governments of the
South German States gathered in 1818 at Frankfort, to draw up a
common concordat with Rome. But owing to the utterly extravagant
pretensions nothing further was reached than a new delimitation in
the bull <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Provida sollersque</foreign>,</q> 1821, of the bishoprics in the so-called
Upper Rhenish Church Province: the archbishopric of Freiburg for
Baden and the two Hohenzollern principalities, the bishoprics of Mainz
for Hesse-Darmstadt, Fulda for Hesse-Cassel, Rottenburg for Württemberg,
Limburg for Nassau and Frankfort; and even this was
given effect to only in 1827, after long discussions, with the provision
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
(bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ad dominicæ gregis custodiam</foreign>) that the choice of the bishops
should issue indeed from the chapter, but that the territorial lord
might strike out objectionable names in the list of candidates previously
submitted to him. The actual equality of Protestants and
Catholics which the pope had not been able to allow in the concordat,
was now in 1880 proclaimed by the princes as the law of the land.
Papal and episcopal indulgences had to receive approval before their
publication; provincial and diocesan synods could be held only with
approval of the government and in presence of the commissioners of
the prince; taxes could not be imposed by any ecclesiastical court; appeal
could be made to the civil court against abuse of spiritual power;
those preparing for the priesthood should receive scientific training at
the universities, practical training in the seminaries for priests, etc.
The pope issued a brief in which he characterized these conditions as
scandalous novelties, and reminded the bishops of Acts v. 29. But
only the Bishop of Fulda followed this advice, with the result that the
Catholic theological faculty at Marburg was after a short career
closed again, and the education of the priests given over to the seminary
at Fulda. Hesse-Darmstadt founded a theological faculty at
Giessen in 1830; Baden had one already in Freiburg, and Würtemberg
had in 1817 affiliated the faculty at Ellwanger with the university
of Tübingen, and endowed it with the revenues of a rich
convent. In all these faculties alongside of rigorous scientific exactness
there prevailed a noble liberalism without the surrender of the
fundamental Catholic faith. The revolutionary year, 1848, first gave
the bishops the hope of a successful struggle for the unconditional
freedom of the church. In order to enforce the Würzburg decrees
(<ref target='Section_192_Para_4'>§ 192, 4</ref>), the five bishops issued in 1851 a joint memorial. As the
governments delayed their answer, they declared in 1852 that they
would immediately act as if all had been granted them; and when at
last the answer came, on most points unfavourable, they said in 1853,
that, obeying God rather than man, they would proceed wholly in
accordance with canon law.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_196_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Catholic Troubles in Baden down to 1873.</emph>&mdash;The Grand Duchy
of Baden, with two-thirds of its population Catholic, where in 1848
the revolution had shattered all the foundations of the state, and
where besides a young ruler had taken the reins of government in his
hands only in 1852, seemed in spite of the widely prevalent liberality
of its clergy, the place best fitted for such an attempt. The Archbishop
of Freiburg, <emph>Herm. von Vicari</emph>, in 1852, now in his eighty-first
year, began by arbitrarily stopping, on the evening of May 9th, the
obsequies of the deceased grand-duke appointed by the Catholic
Supreme Church Council for May 10th, prohibiting at the same time
the saying of mass for the dead (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pro omnibus defunctis</foreign>) usual at
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
Catholic burials, but in Baden and Bavaria hitherto not refused even
to Protestant princes. More than one hundred priests, who disobeyed
the injunction, were sentenced to perform penances. In the following
year he openly declared that he would forthwith carry out the demands
of the episcopal memorial, and did so immediately by appointing
priests in the exercise of absolute authority; and by holding
entrance examinations to the seminary without the presence of royal
commissioners as required by law. As a warning remained unheeded,
the government issued the order that all episcopal indulgences must
before publication be subscribed by a grand-ducal special commissioner
appointed for the purpose. Against him, as well as against all the
members of the Supreme Church Council, the archbishop proclaimed
the ban, issued a fulminating pastoral letter, which was to have been
read with the excommunication in all churches, and ordered preaching
for four weeks for the instruction of the people on these matters.
At the same time he solemnly protested against all supremacy of
the state over the church. The government drove the Jesuits out
of the country, forbad the reading of the pastoral, and punished disobedient
priests with fines and imprisonment. But the archbishop,
spurred on by Ketteler, Bishop of Mainz, advanced more boldly and
recklessly than ever. In May, 1854, the government introduced a
criminal process against him, during the course of which he was kept
prisoner in his own house. The attempts of his party to arouse the
Catholic population by demonstrations had no serious result. At the
close of the investigation the archbishop was released from his confinement
and continued the work as before. The government, however,
still remained firm, and punished every offence. In June, 1855,
however, a provisional agreement was published, and finally in June,
1859, a formal concordat, the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Æterni patris</foreign>, was concluded with
Rome, its concessions to the archbishop almost exceeding even those
of Austria (<ref target='Section_198_Para_2'>§ 198, 2</ref>). In spite of ministerial opposition the second
chamber in March, 1860, brought up the matter before its tribunal,
repudiated the right of the government to conclude a convention with
Rome without the approbation of the states of the realm, and forbad
the grand-duke to enforce it. He complied with this demand,
dismissed the ministry, insisted, in answer to the papal protest, on his
obligation to respect the rights of the constitution, and on October
9th, 1860, sanctioned jointly with the chambers a law on the legal
position of the Catholic and Protestant churches in the state. The
archbishop indeed declared that the concordat could not be abolished
on one side, and still retain the force of law, but in presence of the
firm attitude of the government he desisted, and satisfied himself
with giving in 1861 a grudging acquiescence, by which he secured
to himself greater independence than before in regard to imposing of
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
dues and administration of the church property. Conflicts with the
archbishop, however, and with the clerical minority in the chamber,
still continued. The archbishop died in 1868. His see remained
vacant, as the chapter and the government could not agree about
the list of candidates; the interim administration was carried on by
the vicar-general, Von Kübel (died 1881), as administrator of the
archdiocese, quite in the spirit of his predecessor. The law of October
9th, 1860, had prescribed evidence of general scientific culture as a
condition of appointment to an ecclesiastical office in the Protestant as
well as the Catholic church. Later ordinances required in addition:
Possession of Baden citizenship, having passed a favourable examination
on leaving the university, a university course of at least two
and half years, attendance upon at least three courses of lectures
in the philosophical faculty, and finally also an examination before
a state examining board, within one and half years of the close of
the university curriculum, in the Latin and Greek languages, history
of philosophy, general history, and the history of German literature
(later also the so called <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturexamen</foreign>). The Freiburg curia, however,
protested, and in 1867 forbad clergy and candidates to submit to
this examination or to seek a dispensation from it. The result was,
that forthwith no clergymen could be definitely appointed, but up to
1874 no legal objection was made to interim appointments of parochial
administrators. The educational law of 1868 abolished the confessional
character of the public schools. In 1869 state recognition
was withdrawn from the festivals of Corpus Christi, the holy apostles,
and Mary, as also, on the other hand, from the festivals of Maundy
Thursday and Good Friday. In 1870 obligatory civil marriage
was introduced, while all compulsion to observe the baptismal, confirmational,
and funeral rites of the church was abolished, and a
law on the legal position of benevolent institutions was passed to
withdraw these as much as possible from the administration of the
ecclesiastical authorities. On the subsequent course of events in
Baden, see <ref target='Section_197_Para_14'>§ 197, 14</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_196_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Protestant Troubles in Baden.</emph>&mdash;The union of the Lutheran
and Reformed churches was carried out in the Grand Duchy of
Baden in 1821. It recognised the normative significance of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Augustana</foreign>, as well as the Lutheran and Heidelberg catechisms, in so
far as by it the free examination of scripture as the only source of
Christian faith, is again expressly demanded and applied. A synod
of 1834 provided this state church with union-rationalistic agenda,
hymnbook, and catechism. When there also a confessional Lutheran
sentiment began again in the beginning of 1850 to prevail, the church
of the union opposed this movement by gensdarmes, imprisonment and
fines. The pastor Eichhorn, and later also the pastor Ludwig, with
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
a portion of their congregations left the state church and attached
themselves to the Breslau Upper Church Conference, but amid police
interference could minister to their flocks only under cloud of night.
After long refusal the grand-duke at last in 1854 permitted the
separatists the choice of a Lutheran pastor, but persistently refused
to recognise Eichhorn as such. Pastor Haag, who would not give up
the Lutheran distribution formula at the Lord's supper, was after
solemn warning deposed in 1855. On the other hand the positive
churchly feeling became more and more pronounced in the state
church itself. In 1854 the old rationalist members of the Supreme
Church Council were silenced, and Ullmann of Heidelberg was made
president. Under his auspices a general synod of 1855 presented a
sketch of new church and school books on the lines of the union consensus,
with an endeavour also to be just to the Lutheran views. The
grand-duke confirmed the decision and the country was silent. But
when in 1858 the Supreme Church Council, on the ground of the
Synodal decision of 1855, promulgated the general introduction of
a new church book, a violent storm broke out through the country
against the liturgical novelties contained therein (extension of the
liturgy by confession of sin and faith, collects, responses, Scripture
reading, kneeling at the supper, the making a confession of their
faith by sponsors), the Heidelberg faculty, with Dr. Schenkel at its
head, leading the opposition in the Supreme Church Council. Yet
Hundeshagen, who in the synod had opposed the introduction of a new
agenda, entered the lists against Schenkel and others as the apologist of
the abused church book. The grand-duke then decided that no congregation
should be obliged to adopt the new agenda, while the introduction
of the shorter and simpler form of it was recommended.
The agitations these awakened caused its rejection by most of the
congregations. Meanwhile in consequence of the concordat revolution
in 1860, a new liberal ministry had come into power, and the government
now presented to the chambers a series of thoroughly liberal
schemes for regulating the affairs of the evangelical church, which
were passed by large majorities. Toward the end of the year the
government, by deposing the Supreme Church Councillor Heintz
began to assume the patronage of the supreme ecclesiastical court.
Ullmann and Bähr tendered their resignations, which were accepted.
The new liberal Supreme Church Council, including Holtzmann, Rothe,
etc., now published a sketch of a church constitution on the lines of
ecclesiastical constitutionalism, which with slight modifications the
synod of July, 1861, adopted and the grand-duke confirmed. It provided
for annual diocesan synods of lay and clerical members, and a
general synod every five years. The latter consists of twenty-four
clerical and twenty-four lay members, and six chosen by the grand-duke,
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
besides the prelate, and is represented in the interval by a
standing committee of four members, who have also a seat and vote
in the Supreme Church Council.&mdash;Dr. Schenkel's <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Leben Jesu</foreign></q> of 1864
led the still considerable party among the evangelical clergy who
adhered to the doctrine of the church to agitate for his removal
from his position as director of the Evangelical Pastors' Seminary at
Heidelberg; but it resulted only in this, that no one was obliged to
attend his lectures. The second synod, held almost a year behind
time in 1867, passed a liberal ordination formula. At the next synod
in 1871, the orthodox pietistic party had evidently become stronger,
but was still overborne by the liberal party, whose strength was in
the lay element. Meanwhile a praiseworthy moderation prevailed on
both sides, and an effort was made to work together as peaceably as
possible.&mdash;In Heidelberg a considerable number attached to the old
faith, dissatisfied with the preaching of the four <q>Free Protestant</q>
city pastors, after having been in 1868 refused their request for the
joint use of a city church for private services in accordance with their
religious convictions (<ref target='Section_180_Para_1'>§ 180, 1</ref>), had built for this purpose a chapel
of their own, in which numerously attended services were held under
the direction of Professor Frommel of the gymnasium. When a
vacancy occurred in one of the pastorates in 1880, this believing
minority, anxious for the restoration of unity and peace, as well as
the avoidance of the separation, asked to have Professor Frommel
appointed to the charge. At a preliminary assembly of twenty-one
liberal church members this proposal was warmly supported by the
president, Professor Bluntschli, by all the theological professors, with
the exception of Schenkel and eighteen other liberal voters, and
agreed to by the majority of the two hundred liberals constituting
the assembly. But when the formal election came round the proposal
was lost by twenty-seven to fifty-one votes.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_196_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Hesse-Darmstadt and Nassau.</emph>&mdash;In 1819 the government of the
Grand Duchy of <emph>Hesse</emph> recommended the union of all <emph>Protestant</emph> communities
under one confession. Rhenish Hesse readily agreed to
this, and there in 1822 the union was accomplished. In the other
provinces, however, it did not take effect, although by the rationalism
fostered at Giessen among the clergy and by the popular current of
thought in the communities, the Lutheran as well as the Reformed
confession had been robbed of all significance. But since 1850 even
there a powerful Lutheran reaction among the younger clergy,
zealously furthered by a section of the aristocracy of the state, set in,
especially in the district on the right bank of the Rhine, which has
eagerly opposed the equally eager struggles of the liberal party to
introduce a liberal synodal representative constitution for the
evangelical church of the whole state. These endeavours, however,
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
were frustrated, and at an extraordinary state synod of 1873, on all
controverted questions, the middle party gave their vote in favour of
the absorptive union. The state church was declared to be the united
church. The clause that had been added to the government proposal:
<q>Without prejudice to the status of the confessions of the several communities,</q>
was dropped; the place of residence and not the confession
was that which determined qualifications in the community; the
ordination now expressed obligation to the Reformation confessions
generally, etc. The members of the minority broke off their connection
with the synod, and seventy-seven pastors presented to the synod
a protest against its decisions. The grand-duke then, on the basis
of these deliberations, gave forthwith a charter to the church constitution,
in which indeed the Lutheran, Reformed, and United
churches were embraced in one evangelical state church with a
common church government; but still also, by restoring the phrase
struck out by the synod from § 1, the then existing confessional
status of the several communities was preserved and the confession
itself declared beyond the range of legislation. Yet fifteen Lutheran
pastors represented that they could not conscientiously accept this,
and the upper consistory hastened to remove them from office shortly
before the shutting of the gates, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, before July 1st, 1875, when by
the new law (<ref target='Section_197_Para_15'>§ 197, 15</ref>) depositions of clergy would belong only to the
supreme civil court. The opposing congregations now declared, in
1877, their withdrawal from the state church, and constituted themselves
as a <q>free Lutheran church in Hesse.</q>&mdash;The <emph>Catholic</emph> church in
the Grand Duchy of Hesse, had under the peaceful bishops of Mainz,
Burg (died 1833) and Kaiser (died 1849), caused the government no
trouble. But it was otherwise after Kaiser's death. Rome rejected
Professor Leopold Schmid of Giessen, favoured at Darmstadt and
regularly elected by the chapter (<ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>§ 187, 3</ref>), and the government yielded
to the appointment of the violent ultramontane Westphalian, Baron
von Ketteler. His first aim was the extinction of the Catholic faculty
at Giessen (<ref target='Section_191_Para_2'>§ 191, 2</ref>); he rested not until the last student had been
transferred from it to the newly erected seminary at Mainz (1851).
No less energetic and successful were his endeavours to free the Catholic
church from the supremacy of the state in accordance with the Upper
Rhenish episcopal memorial. The Dalwigk ministry, in 1854, concluded
a <q>provisional agreement</q> with the bishop, which secured to
him unlimited autonomy and sovereignty in all ecclesiastical matters,
and, to satisfy the pope with his desiderata, these privileges were still
further extended in 1856. To this convention, first made publicly
known in 1860, the ministry, in spite of all addresses and protests,
adhered with unfaltering tenacity, although long convinced of its
consequences. The political events of 1886, however, led the grand-duke
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
in September of that year to abrogate the hateful convention.
But the minister as well as the bishop considered this merely to refer
to the episcopal convention of 1850, and treated the agreement with
the pope of 1856 as always still valid. So everything went on in the
old way, even after Ketteler's supreme influence in the state had been
broken by the overthrow of Dalwigk in 1871. Comp. <ref target='Section_197_Para_15'>§ 197, 15</ref>.&mdash;The
Protestant church in the Duchy of <emph>Nassau</emph> attached itself to the
union in 1817. The conflict in the Upper Rhenish church overflowed
even into this little province. The Bishop of Limburg, in opposition
to law and custom, appointed Catholic clergy on his own authority,
and excommunicated the Catholic officers who supported the government,
while the government arrested the temporalities and instituted
criminal proceedings against bishop and chapter. After the conclusion
of the Württemberg and Baden concordats, the government showed
itself disposed to adopt a similar way out of the conflict, and in spite
of all opposition from the States concluded in 1861 a convention with
the bishop, by which almost all his hierarchical claims were admitted.
Thus it remained until the incorporation of Nassau in the Prussian
kingdom in 1866.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_196_Para_5'/>
5. In <emph>Protestant Württemberg</emph> a religious movement among the
people reached a height such as it attained nowhere else. Pietism,
chiliasm, separatism, the holding of conventicles, etc., assumed formidable
dimensions; solid science, philosophical culture, and then also
philosophical and destructive critical tendencies issuing from Tübingen
affected the clergy of this state. Dissatisfaction with various novelties
in the liturgy, the hymnbook, etc., led many formally to separate
from the state church. After attempts at compulsion had proved
fruitless, the government allowed the malcontents under the organizing
leadership of the burgomaster, G. W. Hoffman (died 1846), to form
in 1818 the community of Kornthal, with an ecclesiastical and civil
constitution of its own after the apostolic type. Others emigrated
to South Russia and to North America (§ 211, <ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_211_Para_7'>7</ref>). Out of the
pastoral work of pastor Blumhardt at Möttlingen, who earnestly
preached repentance, there was developed, in connection with the
healing of a demoniac, which had been accompanied with a great
awakening in the community, the <q>gift</q> of healing the sick by
absolution and laying on of hands with contrite believing prayer.
Blumhardt, in order to afford this gift undisturbed exercise, bought
the Bad Boll near Göppingen, and officiated there as pastor and
miraculous healer in the way described. He died in 1880.&mdash;After the
way to a synodal representation of the whole evangelical state church
had been opened up in 1851 by the introduction, according to a royal
ordinance, of parochial councils and diocesan synods, the consistory
having also in 1858 published a scheme referring thereto, the whole
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
business was brought to a standstill, until at last in 1867, by means of
a royal edict, the calling of a State Synod consisting of twenty-five
clerical and as many lay members was ordered, and consequently in
February, 1869, such a synod met for the first time. Co-operation in
ecclesiastical legislation was assigned to it as its main task, while it
had also the right to advise in regard to proposals about church
government, also to make suggestions and complaints on such matters,
but the confession of the evangelical church was not to be touched,
and lay entirely outside of its province. A liberal enactment with
regard to dissenters was sanctioned by the chamber in 1870.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_196_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The Catholic Church in Württemberg.</emph>&mdash;Even after the founding of
the bishopric of Rottenberg the government maintained strictly the
previously exercised rights of sovereignty over the Catholic church,
to which almost one-third of the population belonged, and the almost
universally prevalent liberalism of the Catholic clergy found in this
scarcely any offence. A new order of divine service in 1837, which,
with the approval of the episcopal council, recommended the introduction
of German hymns in the services, dispensing the sacraments
in the German language, restriction of the festivals, masses, and
private masses, processions, etc., did indeed cause riots in several
places, in which, however, the clergy took no part. But when in
1837, in consequence of the excitement caused throughout Catholic
Germany by the Cologne conflict (<ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>§ 193, 1</ref>), the hitherto only isolated
cases of lawless refusal to consecrate mixed marriages had increased,
the government proceeded severely to punish offending clergymen,
and transported to a village curacy a Tübingen professor, Mack, who
had declared the compulsory celebration unlawful. Called to account
by the nuncio of Munich for his indolence in all these affairs and
severely threatened, old Bishop Keller at last resolved, in 1841, to
lay before the chamber a formal complaint against the injury done
to the Catholic church, and to demand the freeing of the church from
the sovereignty of the state. In the second chamber this motion was
simply laid <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad acta</foreign>, but in the first it was recommended that the
king should consider it. The bishop, however, and the liberal
chapter could not agree as to the terms of the demand, contradictory
opinions were expressed, and things remained as they were. But
Bishop Keller fell into melancholy and died in 1845. His successor
took his stand upon the memorial and declaration of the Upper
Rhenish bishops, and immediately in 1853 began the conflict by
forbidding his clergy, under threats of severe censure, to submit as
law required to civil examinations. The government that had
hitherto so firmly maintained its sovereign rights, under pressure of
the influence which a lady very nearly related to the king exercised
over him, gave in without more ado, quieted the bishop first of all by
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
a convention in 1854, and then entered into negotiations with the
Roman curia, out of which came in 1857 a concordat proclaimed by
the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cum in sublimi</foreign>, which, in surrender of a sovereign right of
the state over the affairs of the church, far exceeds that of Austria
(<ref target='Section_198_Para_2'>§ 198, 2</ref>). The government left unheeded all protests and petitions
from the chambers for its abolition. But the example of Baden and
the more and more decided tone of the opposition obliged the government
at last to yield. The second chamber in 1861 decreed the
abrogation of the concordat, and a royal rescript declared it abolished.
In the beginning of 1862 a bill was submitted by the new ministry
and passed into law by both chambers for determining the relations of
the Catholic church to the state. The royal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign> or right of permitting
or refusing, is required for all clerical enactments which are
not purely inter-ecclesiastical but refer to mixed matters; the theological
endowments are subject to state control and joint administration;
boys' seminaries are not allowed; clergymen appointed to office
must submit to state examination; according to consuetudinary
rights, about two-thirds of the benefices are filled by the king, one-third
by the bishops on reporting to the civil court, which has the
right of protest; clergy who break the law are removable by the civil
court, etc. The curia indeed lodged a protest, but the for the most
part peace-loving clergy reared, not in the narrowing atmosphere of
the seminaries but amid the scientific culture of the university, in
the halls of Tübingen, submitted all the more easily as they found
that in all inter-ecclesiastical matters they had greater freedom and
independence under the concordat than before.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_196_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>The Imperial Territory of Alsace and Lorraine since 1871.</emph>&mdash;After
Alsace with German Lorraine had again, in consequence of the Franco-Prussian
war, been united to Germany and as an imperial territory
had been placed under the rule of the new German emperor, the
secretary of the Papal States, Cardinal Antonelli, in the confident
hope of being able to secure in return the far more favourable conditions,
rights and claims of the Catholic church in Prussia with the
autocracy of the bishops unrestricted by the state, declared in a letter
to the Bishop of Strassburg, that the concordat of 1801 (<ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>§ 203, 1</ref>) was
annulled. But when the imperial government showed itself ready to
accept the renunciation, and to make profit out of it in the opposite
way from that intended, the cardinal hasted in another letter to explain
how by the incorporation with Germany a new arrangement had
become necessary, but that clearly the old must remain in force until
the new one has been promulgated. Also a petition of the Catholic
clergy brought to Berlin by the bishop himself, which laid claim to
this unlimited dominion over all Catholic educational and benevolent
institutions, failed of its purpose. The clergy therefore wrought for
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
this all the more zealously by fanaticizing the Catholic people in
favour of French and against German interests. On the epidemic
about the appearance of the mother of God called forth in this way,
see <ref target='Section_188_Para_7'>§ 188, 7</ref>. In 1874 the government found itself obliged to close
the so-called <q>little seminaries,</q> or boys' colleges, on account of their
fostering sentiments hostile to the empire. Yet in 1880 the newly appointed
imperial governor, Field-marshal von Manteuffel (died 1885), at
the request of the States-Committee, allowed Bishop Räss of Strassburg
to reopen the seminary at Zillisheim, with the proviso that his teachers
should be approved by the government, and that instruction in the
German language should be introduced. Manteuffel has endeavoured
since, by yielding favours to the France-loving Alsatians and
Lorrainers, and to their ultramontane clergy, to win them over to the
idea of the German empire, even to the evident sacrifice of the interests
of resident Germans and of the Protestant church. But such
fondling has wrought the very opposite result to that intended.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_197'/>
<head>§ 197. The so-called Kulturkampf in the German
Empire.<note place='foot'>Geffcken, <q>Church and State.</q> 2 vols. London, 1877. Vol. ii.,
pp. 488-531.</note></head>

<p>
Ultramontanism had for the time being granted to the Prussian
state, which had not only allowed it absolutely free scope
but readily aided its growth throughout the realm (<ref target='Section_193_Para_2'>§ 193,
2</ref>), an indulgence for that offence which is in itself unatoneable,
having a Protestant dynasty. Pius IX. had himself
repeatedly expressed his satisfaction at the conduct of the
government. But the league which Prussia made in 1866
with the <q>church-robbing Sub-alpine,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> Italian, government,
was not at all to the taste of the curia. The day of
Sadowa, 3rd July, 1866, called from Antonelli the mournful
cry, <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Il mondo cessa</foreign>, <q>The world has gone to ruin,</q> and
the still more glorious day of Sedan, 2nd September, 1870,
completely put the bottom out of the Danaid's vessel of
ultramontane forbearance and endurance. This day, 18th
January, 1871, had as its result the overthrow of the temporal
power of the papacy as well the establishment of a
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
new and hereditary German empire under the Protestant
dynasty of the Prussian Hohenzollerns. German ultramontanism
felt itself all the more under obligation to demand
from the new emperor as the first expiation for such uncanonical
usurpation, the reinstatement of the pope in his
lost temporal power. But when he did not respond to this
demand, the ultramontane party, by means of the press
favourable to its claims, formally declared war against the
German empire and its governments, and applied itself
systematically to the mobilization of its entire forces. But
the empire and its governments, with Prussia in the van,
with unceasing determination, supported by the majority
of the States' representatives, during the years 1871-1875
proceeded against the ultramontanes by legislative measures.
The execution of these by the police and the courts of law,
owing to the stubborn refusal to obey on the part of the
higher and lower clergy, led to the formation of an opposition,
commonly designated after a phrase of the Prussian
deputy, Professor Virchow, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign>,</q> which was in
some degree modified first in 1887. The imperial chancellor,
Prince Bismarck, uttered at the outset the confident, self-assertive
statement, <q>We go not to Canossa,</q>&mdash;and even in
1880, when it seemed as if a certain measure of submission
was coming from the side of the papacy, and the Prussian
government also showed itself prepared to make important
concessions, he declared, <q>We shall not buy peace with
Canossa medals; such are not minted in Germany.</q> Since
1880, however, the Prussian government with increasing
compliance from year to year set aside and modified the
most oppressive enactments of the May laws, so as actually
to redress distresses and inconveniences occasioned by clerical
opposition to these laws, without being able thereby to
obtain any important concession on the part of the papal
curia, until at last in 1887, after the government had carried
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
concession to the utmost limit, the pope put his seal to
definitive terms of peace by admitting the right of giving
information on the part of the bishops regarding appointments
to vacant pastorates, as well as the right of protest
on the part of the government against those thus nominated.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Aggression of Ultramontanism.</emph>&mdash;Even in the revolution year,
1848, German ultramontanism, in order to obtain what it called the
freedom of the church, had zealously seconded many of the efforts of
democratic radicalism. Nevertheless, in the years of reaction that
followed, it succeeded in catching most of the influential statesmen on
the limed twig of the assurance that the episcopal hierarchy, with its
unlimited sway over the clergy and through them over the feelings
of the people, constituted the only certain and dependable bulwark
against the revolutionary movements of the age, and this idea prevailed
down to 1860, and in Prussia down to 1871. But the overthrow
of the concordat in Baden, Württemberg and Darmstadt by the states
of the realm after a hard conflict, the humiliation of Austria in 1866,
and the growth in so threatening a manner since of the still heretical
Prussia, produced in the whole German episcopate a terrible apprehension
that its hitherto untouched supremacy in the state would be
at an end, and in order to ward off this danger it was driven into
agitations and demonstrations partly secret and partly open. On 8th
October, 1868, the papal nuncio in Munich, Monsignor Meglia, uttered
his inmost conviction regarding the Württemberg resident thus:
<q>Only in America, England, and Belgium does the Catholic church
receive its rights; elsewhere nothing can help us but the revolution.</q>
And on 22nd April, 1869, Bishop Senestray of Regensburg declared
plainly in a speech delivered at Schwandorff: <q>If kings will no longer
be of God's grace, I shall be the first to overthrow the throne....
Only a war or revolution can help us in the end.</q> And war at last
came, but it helped only their opponents. Although at its outbreak
in 1870 the ultramontane party in South Germany, especially in
Bavaria, for the most part with unexampled insolence expressed their
sympathy with France, and after the brilliant and victorious close of
the war did everything to prevent the attachment of Bavaria to the
new German empire, their North German brethren, accustomed to
the boundless compliance of the Prussian government, indulged the
hope of prosecuting their own ends all the more successfully under
the new regime. Even in November, 1870, Archbishop Ledochowski
of Posen visited the victorious king of Prussia at Versailles, in order
to interest him personally in the restoration of the Papal States. In
February, 1871, in the same place, fifty-six Catholic deputies of the
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
Prussian parliament presented to the king, who had meanwhile been
proclaimed Emperor of Germany, a formal petition for the restoration
of the temporal power of the pope, and soon afterwards a deputation
of distinguished laymen waited upon him <q>in name of all the Catholics
of Germany,</q> with an address directed to the same end. The
<emph>Bavarian Fatherland</emph> (Dr. Sigl) indeed treated it with scorn as a
<q>belly-crawling-deputation, which crawled before the magnanimous
hero-emperor, beseeching him graciously to use said deputation as
his spittoon.</q> And the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Steckenberger Bote</foreign>, inspired by Dr. Ketteler,
declared: <q>We Catholics do not entreat it as a favour, but demand it
as our right.... Either you must restore the Catholic church to all
its privileges or not one of all your existing governments will endure.</q>
At the same time as the insinuation was spread that the new German
empire threatened the existence of the Catholic church in Germany, a
powerful ultramontane election agitation in view of the next Reichstag
was set on foot, out of which grew the party of the <q>Centre,</q>
so called from sitting in the centre of the hall, with Von Ketteler,
Windthorst, Mallinkrodt (died 1874), and the two Reichenspergers,
as its most eloquent leaders. Even in the debate on the address in
answer to the speech from the throne this party demanded intervention,
at first indeed only diplomatic, in favour of the Papal States.
In the discussion on the new imperial constitution A. Reichensperger
sought to borrow from the abortive German landowners' bill of 1848,
condemned indeed as godless by the syllabus (<ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>§ 185, 2</ref>), principles that
might serve the turn of ultramontanism regarding the unrestricted
liberty of the press, societies, meetings, and religion, with the most
perfect independence of all religious communities of the State.
Mallinkrodt insisted upon the need of enlarged privileges for the
Catholic church owing to the great growth of the empire in Catholic
territory and population. All these motions were rejected by the
Reichstag, and the Prussian government answered them by abolishing
in July, 1871, the Catholic department of the Ministry of Public
Worship, which had existed since 1841 (<ref target='Section_193_Para_2'>§ 193, 2</ref>). The <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Genfer
Korrespondenz</foreign>, shortly before highly praised by the pope, declared:
If kings do not help the papacy to regain its rights, the papacy must
also withdraw from them and appeal directly to the hearts of the
people. <q>Understand ye the terrible range of this change? Your
hours, O ye princes, are numbered!</q> The Berlin <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Germania</foreign> pointed
threateningly to the approaching <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>revanche</foreign> war in France, on the
outbreak of which the German empire would no longer be able
to reckon on the sympathy of its Catholic subjects; and the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Ellwanger
kath. Wochenblatt</foreign> proclaimed openly that only France is able
to guard and save the Catholic church from the annihilating projects
of Prussia. And in this way the Catholic people throughout all
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
Germany were roused and incited by the Catholic press, as well as
from the pulpit and confessional, in home and school, in Catholic
monasteries and nunneries, in mechanics' clubs and peasants' unions,
in casinos and assemblies of nobles. Bishop Ketteler founded expressly
for purposes of such agitations the Mainz Catholic Union, in
September, 1871, which by its itinerant meetings spread far and wide
the flame of religious fanaticism; and a Bavarian priest, Lechner,
preached from the pulpit that one does not know whether the German
princes are by God's or by the devil's grace.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Conflicts Occasioned by Protection of the Old Catholics, 1871-1872.</emph>&mdash;That
the Prussian government refused to assist the bishops in persecuting
the Old Catholics, and even retained these in their positions
after excommunication had been hurled against them, was regarded
by those bishops as itself an act of persecution of the Catholic church.
To this opinion they gave official expression, under solemn protest
against all encroachments of the state upon the domain of Catholic
faith and law, in a memorial addressed to the German emperor from
Fulda, on September 7th, 1871, but were told firmly and decidedly to
keep within their own boundaries. Even before this Bishop <emph>Krementz
of Ermeland</emph> had refused the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>missio canonica</foreign> to Dr. Wollmann, teacher
of religion at the Gymnasium of Braunsberg, on account of his refusing
to acknowledge the dogma of infallibility, and had forbidden
Catholic scholars to attend his instructions. The minister of public
worship, Von Mühler, decided, because religious instruction was obligatory
in the Prussian gymnasia, that all Catholic scholars must attend
or be expelled from the institution. The Bavarian government followed
a more correct course in a similar case that arose about the
same time; for it recognised and protected the religious instructions
of the anti-infallibilist priest, Renftle in Mering, as legitimate, but
still allowed parents who objected to withhold their children from it.
And in this way the new Prussian minister, Falk, corrected his predecessor's
mistake. But all the more decidedly did the government
proceed against Bishop Krementz, when he publicly proclaimed the
excommunication uttered against Dr. Wollmann and Professor
Michelis, which had been forbidden by Prussian civil law on account
of the infringement of civil rights connected therewith according
to canon law. As the bishop could not be brought to an explicit
acknowledgment of his obligation to obey the laws of the land, the
minister of public worship on October 1st, 1872, stripped him of his
temporalities. But meanwhile a second conflict had broken out. The
Catholic field-provost of the Prussian army and bishop <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>,
Namszanowski, had under papal direction commanded the Catholic
divisional chaplain, Lünnemann of Cologne, on pain of excommunication,
to discontinue the military worship in the garrison chapel,
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
which, by leave of the military court, was jointly used by the Old
Catholics, and so was desecrated. He was therefore brought before a
court of discipline, suspended from his office in May, 1872, and finally,
by royal ordinance in 1873, the office of field-provost was wholly
abolished.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Struggles over Educational Questions, 1872-1873.</emph>&mdash;In the formerly
Polish provinces of the Prussian kingdom the Polonization of resident
Catholic Germans had recently assumed threatening proportions. The
archbishop of Posen and Gnesen, Count <emph>Ledochowski</emph>, whom the pope
during the Vatican Council appointed primate of Poland, was the
main centre of this agitation. In the Posen priest seminary he formed
for himself, in a fanatically Polish clergy, the tools for carrying it out,
and in the neighbouring Schrimm he founded a Jesuit establishment
that managed the whole movement. Where previously Polish and
German had been preached alternately, German was now banished,
and in the public schools, the oversight of which, as throughout all
Prussia, lay officially in the hands of the clergy, all means were used
to discourage the study of the German language, and to stamp out the
German national sentiment. But even in the two western provinces
the Catholic public schools were made by the clerical school inspectors
wholly subservient to the designs of ultramontanism. In order to
stem such disorder the government, in February, 1872, sanctioned the
<emph>School Inspection Law</emph> passed by the parliament, by which the right
and duty of school inspection was transferred from the church to the
state, so that for the sake of the state the clerical inspectors hostile
to the government were set aside, and where necessary might be
replaced by laymen. A pastoral letter of the Prussian bishops
assembled at Fulda in April of that year complained bitterly of
persecution of the church and unchristianizing of the schools, but
advised the Catholic clergy under no circumstances voluntarily to
resign school inspection where it was not taken from them. By a
rescript of the minister of public worship in June, the exclusion of
all members of spiritual orders and congregations from teaching in
public schools was soon followed by the suppression of the Marian
congregations in all schools, and it was enjoined in March, 1873, that
in Polish districts, where other subjects had been taught in the higher
educational institutions in the German language, this also would be
obligatory in religious instruction. Ledochowski indeed directed all
religious teachers in his diocese to use the Polish language after as
they had done before, but the government suspended all teachers who
followed his direction, and gave over the religious instruction to
lay teachers. The archbishop now erected private schools for the
religious instruction of gymnasial teachers, and the government forbad
attendance at them.
</p>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Kanzelparagraph and the Jesuit law, 1871-1872.</emph>&mdash;While thus
the Prussian government took more and more decided measures
against the ultramontanism that had become so rampant in its
domains, on the other hand, its mobile band of warriors in cassock,
dress coat, and blouse did not cease to labour, and the imperial government
passed some drastic measures of defence applicable to the whole
empire. At the instance of the Bavarian government, which could
not defend itself from the violence of its <q>patriots,</q> the Federal
Council asked the Reichstag to add a new article to the penal code
of the empire, threatening any misuse of the pulpit for political
agitation with imprisonment for two years. The Bavarian minister
of public worship, Lutz, undertook himself to support this bill before
the Reichstag. <q>For several decades,</q> he said, <q>the clergy in Germany
have assumed a new character; they are become the simple
reflection of Jesuitism.</q> The Reichstag sanctioned the bill in December,
1871. Far more deeply than this so-called <emph>Kanzelparagraph</emph>, the
operation of which the agitation of the clergy by a little circumspection
could easily elude, did the <emph>Jesuit Law</emph>, published on July 4th,
1872, cut into the flesh of German ultramontanism. Already in April
of that year had a petition from Cologne demanding the expulsion of
the Jesuits been presented to the Reichstag. Similar addresses flowed
in from other places. The Centre party, on the other hand, organized
a regular flood of petitions in favour of the Jesuits. The Reichstag
referred both to the imperial chancellor, with the request to introduce
a law against the movements of the Jesuits as dangerous to the State.
The Federal Council complied with this request, and so the law was
passed which ordained the removal of the Jesuits and related orders
and congregations, the closing of their institutions within six months,
and prohibited the formation of any other orders by their individual
members, and the government authorised the banishment of foreign
members and the interning of natives at appointed places. A later
ordinance of the Federal Council declared the Redemptorists, Lazarists,
Priests of the Holy Ghost, and the Society of the Heart of Jesus to be
orders related to the Society of Jesus. Those affected by this law
anticipated the threatened interning by voluntarily removing to
Belgium, Holland, France, Turkey, and America.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Prussian Ecclesiastical Laws, 1873-1875.</emph>&mdash;In order to be able
to check ultramontanism, even in its pædagogical breeding places, the
episcopal colleges and seminaries, and at the same time to restrict
by law the despotic absolutism of the bishops in disciplinary and
beneficiary matters, the Prussian government brought in other four
ecclesiastical bills, which in spite of violent opposition on the part
of the Centre and the Old Conservatives, were successively passed by
both houses of parliament, and approved by the king on May 11th,
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
12th, 13th, and 14th, 1873. Their most important provisions are:
As a condition for admission to a spiritual office the state requires
citizenship of the German empire, three years' study at a German
university, and, besides an exit gymnasial examination preceding
the university course, a state examination in general knowledge (in
philosophy, history, and German literature), in addition to the theological
examination. The episcopal boys' seminaries and colleges are
abolished. The priest seminaries, if the minister of worship regards
them as fit for the purpose, may take the place of the university
course, but must be under regular state inspection. The candidates
for spiritual offices, which must never be left vacant more than a
year, are to be named to the chief president of the province, and he
can for cogent reasons lodge a protest against them. Secession from
the church is freely allowed, and releases from all personal obligations
to pay ecclesiastical dues and perform ecclesiastical duties.
Excommunication is permissible, but can be proclaimed only in
the congregation concerned, and not publicly. The power of church
discipline over the clergy can be exercised only by German superiors
and in accordance with fixed processional procedure. Corporal
punishment is not permissible, fines are allowed to a limited extent,
and restraint by interning in so-called <foreign rend='italic'>Demeriti</foreign> houses, but only at
furthest of three months, and when the party concerned willingly
consents. Church servants, whose remaining in office is incompatible
with the public order, can be deposed by civil sentence. And as
final court of appeal in all cases of complaint between ecclesiastical
and civil authorities as well as within the ecclesiastical domain, a
royal court of justice for ecclesiastical affairs is constituted, whose
proceedings are open and its decision final.&mdash;But even the May Laws
soon proved inadequate for checking the insolence of the bishops and
the disorders among the Catholic population occasioned thereby. In
December, 1873, therefore, by sovereign authority there was prescribed
a new formula of the episcopal Oath of Allegiance, recognising more
distinctly and decisively the duty of obedience to the laws of the
state. Then next a bill was presented to the parliament, which
had been kept in view in the original constitution, demanding obligatory
civil marriage and abolition of compulsory baptism, as well
as the conducting of civil registration by state officials. In February,
1874, it was passed into law. On the 20th and 21st <emph>May, 1874</emph>, two
other bills brought in for extending the May Laws of the previous
year, in consequence of which a bishop's see vacated by death, a
judicial sentence, or any other cause, must be filled within the space
of a year, and the chapter must elect within ten days an episcopal
administrator, who has to be presented to the chief president, and to
undertake an oath to obey the laws of the state. If the chapter does
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
not fulfil these requirements, a lay commissioner will be appointed to
administer the affairs of the diocese. During the episcopal vacancy,
all vacant pastorates, as well as all not legally filled, can be at once
validly supplied by the act of the patron, and, where no such right
exists, by congregational election. Parochial property, on the illegal
appointment of a pastor, is given over to be administered by a lay
commissioner.&mdash;The empire also came to the help of the May Laws
by an imperial enactment of May 4th, 1874, sanctioned by the
emperor, which empowers the competent state government to intern
all church officers discharged from their office and not yielding submission
thereto, as well as all punished on account of incompetence
in their official duties, and, if this does not help, to condemn them
to loss of their civil rights and to expulsion from the German federal
territory.&mdash;Also in its next session the imperial house of representatives
again gave legislative sanction to the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign>; for
in January, 1875, it passed a bill presented by the Federal Council
on the deposition on oath as to personal rank, and on divorce with
obligatory civil marriage, which, going far beyond the Prussian civil
law of the previous year, and especially ridding Bavaria of its
strait-jacket canon marriage law enforced by the concordat, abolished
the spiritual jurisdiction in favour of that of the civil courts, and
gave it to the state to determine the qualifications for, as well as
the hindrances to, divorce, without, however, touching the domain
of conscience, or entrenching in any way upon the canon law and the
demands of the church.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Opposition in the States to the Prussian May Laws.</emph>&mdash;Bishop Martin
of Paderborn had even beforehand refused obedience to the May
Laws of 1873. After their promulgation, all the Prussian bishops
collectively declared to the ministry that <q>they were not in a position
to carry out these laws,</q> with the further statement that they could
not comply even with those demands in them which in other states,
by agreement with the pope, are acknowledged by the church,
because they are administered in a one-sided way by the state in
Prussia. On these lines also they proceeded to take action. First of
all, the refractoriness of several of the seminaries drew down upon
them the loss of endowment and of the right of representation; and
in the next place, the refusal of the bishops to notify their appointment
of clergymen led to their being frequently fined, while the
church books and seals were taken away from clergymen so appointed,
all the official acts performed by them were pronounced
invalid in civil law, and those who performed them were subjected
to fines. But here, too, again Bishop Martin, well skilled in church
history (he had been previously professor of theology in Bonn), had
beforehand in a pastoral instructed his clergy that <q>since the days
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
of Diocletian there had not been seen so violent a persecution of the
name of Jesus Christ.</q> Soon after this Archbishop Ledochowski, in
an official document addressed to the Chief President of Poland, compared
the demand to give notification of clerical appointments with
the demand of ancient Rome upon Christian soldiers to sacrifice to
the heathen gods. And by order of the pope prayers were offered
in all churches for the church so harshly and cruelly persecuted.
And yet the whole <q>persecution</q> then consisted in nothing more
than this, that a newly issued law of the state, under threat of fine
in case of disobedience, demanded again of the bishops paid by the
state what had been accepted for centuries as unobjectionable in
the originally Catholic Bavaria, and also for a long while in France,
Portugal, and other Romish countries, what all Prussian bishops
down to 1850 (<ref target='Section_193_Para_2'>§ 193, 2</ref>) had done without scruple, what the bishops
of Paderborn and Münster even had never refused to do in the
extra-Prussian portion of these dioceses (Oldenburg and Waldeck),
as also the Prince-Bishop of Breslau, since the issuing of the similar
Austrian May Laws (<ref target='Section_198_Para_4'>§ 198, 4</ref>) in the Austro-Silesian part of his
diocese, what the episcopal courts of Württemberg and Baden had
yielded to, although in almost all these states the demand referred
to broke up the union with the papal curia. Yet before a year had
passed the cases of punishment for these offences had so increased that
the only very inadequate fines that could be exacted by the seizure
of property had to be changed into equivalent sentences of imprisonment.
The first prelate who suffered this fate was Archbishop
Ledochowski, in February, 1874. Then followed in succession: Eberhard
of Treves, Melchers of Cologne, Martin of Paderborn, and
Brinkmann of Münster. The ecclesiastical court of justice expressly
pronounced deposition against Ledochowski in April, 1874; against
Martin in January, 1875, and against the Prince-Bishop Förster of
Breslau in October, 1875, who alone had dared to proclaim in his
diocese the encyclical <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quod nunquam</foreign> (Par. 7). But the latter had
even beforehand withdrawn the diocesan property to the value of
900,000 marks to his episcopal castle, Johannisberg, in Austro-Silesia,
where with a truly princely income from Austrian funds he could
easily get over the loss of the Prussian part of his revenues. Martin,
who had been interned at Wesel, fled in August, 1875, under cloud
of night, to Holland, from whence he transferred his agitations into
Belgium, and finally to London (died 1879). Ledochowski found a
residence in the Vatican. Brinkmann was deposed in March, and
Melchers in June, 1876, after both had beforehand proved their
enjoyment of martyrdom by escaping to Holland. Eberhard of
Treves anticipated his deposition from office by his death in May,
1876. Blum of Limburg was deposed in June, 1877, and Beckmann
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
of Osnabrück died in 1878.&mdash;In the Prussian parliament and German
Reichstag the Centre party, supported by Guelphs, Poles, and the
Social Democrats, had meanwhile with anger, scorn, and vituperation,
with and without wit, fought not only against all ecclesiastical,
but also against all other legislative proposals, whose acceptance was
specially desired by the government. And all the representatives of
the ultramontane press within and without Europe vied with one
another in violent denunciation of the ecclesiastical laws, and in
unmeasured abuse of the emperor and the empire. But almost without
exception the Roman Catholic officials in Prussia, as well as the
Protestants and Old Catholics, carried out <q>the Diocletian persecution
of Christians</q> in the judicial and police measures introduced by the
church laws. A number of Catholic notables of the eastern provinces
of their own accord, in a dutiful address to the emperor, expressly
accepted the condemned laws, and won thereby the nickname of
<q>State Catholics.</q> The great mass of the Catholic people, high and
low, remained unflinchingly faithful to the resisting clergy in, for
the most part, only a passive opposition, although even, as the
Berlin <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Germania</foreign> expressed it, <q>the Catholic rage at the Bismarckian
ecclesiastical polity could condense itself into one Catholic head</q>
in a murderous attempt on the chancellor in quest of health at
Kissingen, on July 13th, 1874. It was the cooper, Kullmann, who,
fanaticised by exciting speeches and writings in the Catholic society
of Salzwedel, sought to take vengeance, as he himself said, upon the
chancellor for the May Laws and <q>the insult offered to his party
of the Centre.</q>&mdash;In the further course of the Prussian <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign>,
however, fostered by the aid of the confessional, the insinuating
assiduity of the clerical press, and the all-prevailing influence of the
thoroughly disciplined Catholic clergy over the popish masses, the
Centre grew in number and importance at the elections from session
to session, so that from the beginning of 1880, by the unhappy
division of the other parties in the Reichstag as well as Chamber,
it united sometimes with the Conservatives, sometimes and most
frequently with the Progressionists and Democrats renouncing the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign>, and was supported on all questions by Poles, Danes,
Guelphs, and Alsatian-Lorrainers, as clerical interest and ultramontane
tactics required, in accordance with the plan of campaign of the
commander-in-chief, especially of the quondam Hanoverian minister,
Windthorst, dominated far more by Guelphic than by ultramontane
tendencies. The Centre was thus able to turn the scale, until, at
least in the Reichstag, after the dissolution and new election of 1887,
its dominatory power was broken by the closer combination of the
conservative and national liberal parties.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Share in the Conflict taken by the Pope.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Pius IX.</emph> had congratulated
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
the new emperor in 1871, trusting, as he wrote, that his efforts
directed to the common weal <q>might bring blessing not only to
Germany, but also to all Europe, and might contribute not a little
to the protection of the liberty and rights of the Catholic religion.</q>
And when first of all the Centre party, called forth by the election
agitation of German ultramontanism, opened its politico-clerical
campaign in the Reichstag, he expressed his disapproval of its
proceedings upon Bismarck's complaining to the papal secretary
Antonelli. Yet a deputation of the Centre sent to Rome succeeded
in winning over both. In order to build a bridge for the securing
an understanding with the curia, now that the conflict had grown
in extent and bitterness, the imperial government in May, 1872,
appointed the Bavarian Cardinal Prince Hohenlohe to the vacant
post of ambassador to the Vatican. But the pope, with offensive recklessness,
rejected the well-meant proposal, and forbade the cardinal
to accept the imperial appointment. From that time he gave free
and public expression on every occasion to his senseless bitterness
against the German empire and its government. In an address to
the German Reading Society at Rome in July, 1872, he allowed
himself to use the most violent expressions against the German
chancellor, and closed with the prophetic threatening: <q>Who knows
but the little stone shall soon loose itself from the mountain (Dan.
ii. 34), which shall break in pieces the foot of the colossus?</q> But
even this diatribe was cast in the shade by the Christmas allocution
of that year, in which he was not ashamed to characterize the procedure
of the German statesmen and their imperial sovereign as
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>impudentia</foreign>.</q> And after the publication of the first May Laws he
addressed a letter to the emperor, in which, founding upon the fact
that even the emperor like all baptized persons belonged to him,
the pope, he cast in his teeth that <q>all the measures of his government
for some time aimed more and more at the annihilation of
Catholicism,</q> and added the threatening announcement that <q>these
measures against the religion of Jesus Christ can have no other result
than the overthrow of his own throne.</q> The emperor in his answer
made expressly prominent his divinely appointed call as well as his
own evangelical standpoint, and with becoming dignity and earnestness
decidedly repudiated the unmeasured assumptions of the papacy,
and published both letters. In the same style of immoderate pretension
the pope again, in November, 1875, in one encyclical after
another, gave vent to his anger against emperor and empire, especially
its military institutions. In place of the deposed and at that time
imprisoned archbishop, Ledochowski, he appointed in 1874 a native
apostolic legate, who was at last ascertained to be the Canon
Kurowski, when he was in October, 1875, condemned to two years'
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
imprisonment. But the pope took the most decided and successful
step by the <emph>Encyclical Quod nunquam, of 5th February, 1875</emph>, addressed
to the Prussian episcopate, in which he characterized the Prussian
May Laws as <q>not given to free citizens to demand a reasonable
obedience, but as laid upon slaves, in order to force obedience by
fears of violence,</q> and, <q>in order to fulfil the duties of his office,</q>
declared quite openly to all whom it concerns and to the Catholics
throughout the world: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Leges illas irritas esse, utpote quæ divinæ
Ecclesiæ constitutioni prorsus adversantur</foreign></q>; but upon those <q>godless</q>
men who make themselves guilty of the sin of assuming spiritual
office without a divine call, falls <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>eo ipso</foreign> the great excommunication.
On the other hand he rewarded, in March, 1875, Archbishop Ledochowski,
then still in prison, but afterwards, in February, 1876,
settled in Rome, for his sturdy resistance of those laws, with a
cardinal's hat, and to the not less persistent Prince-Bishop Förster
of Breslau he presented on his jubilee as priest the archiepiscopal
pall. In the next Christmas allocution he romanced about a second
Nero, who, while in one place with a lyre in his hand he enchanted
the world by lying words, in other places appeared with iron in his
hand, and, if he did not make the streets run with blood, he fills the
prisons, sends multitudes into exile, seizes upon and with violence
assumes all authority to himself. Also to the German pilgrims who
went in May, 1877, to his episcopal jubilee at Rome, he had still
much that was terrible to tell about this <q>modern Attila,</q> leaving
it uncertain whether he intended Prince Bismarck or the mild, pious
German emperor himself.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>The Conflict about the Encyclical Quod nunquam of 1875.</emph>&mdash;By this
encyclical the pope had completely broken up the union between the
Prussian state and the curia, resting upon the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De salute animarum</foreign>
(<ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>§ 193, 1</ref>); for he, bluntly repudiating the sovereign rights
of the civil authority therein expressly allowed, by pronouncing the
laws of the Prussian state invalid, authorized and promoted the rebellion
of all Catholic subjects against them. The Prussian government
now issued three new laws quickly after one another, cutting more
deeply than all that went before, which without difficulty received
the sanction of all the legislative bodies. I. The so called <emph>Arrestment
Act</emph> (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sperrgesetz</foreign>) of April 22nd, 1875, which ordered the immediate
suspension of all state payments to the Roman Catholic bishoprics
and pastorates until those who were entitled to them had in writing
or by statement declared themselves ready to yield willing obedience
to the existing laws of the state. II. A law of May 31st, 1875, ordering
the <emph>Expulsion of all Orders and such like Congregations</emph> within eight
months, the minister of public worship, however, being authorized to
extend this truce to four years in the case of institutions devoted to
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
the education of the young, while those which were exclusively hospital
and nursing societies were allowed to remain, but were subject
to state inspection and might at any time be suppressed by royal
order. III. A law of June 12th, 1875, declaring the formal <emph>Abrogation
of the Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Eighteenth Articles of the Constitution</emph>
(<ref target='Section_193_Para_2'>§ 193, 2</ref>). And finally in addition there came the enforcement during
this session of the Chamber of laws previously introduced on the
rights of the Old Catholics (<ref target='Section_190_Para_2'>§ 190, 2</ref>), and, on June 20th, 1875, on the
administration of church property in Catholic parishes. The latter
measures aimed at withdrawing the administration referred to from
the autocratic absolutism of the clergy, and transferring it to a lay
commission elected by the community itself, of which the parish
priest was to be a member, but not the president. Although the
Archbishop of Cologne in name of all the bishops before its issue had
solemnly protested against this law, because by it <q>essential and
inalienable rights of the Catholic church were lost,</q> and although
the recognition of it actually involved recognition of the May Laws
and the ecclesiastical court of justice, yet all the bishops declared
themselves ready to co-operate in carrying out the arrangements
for surrendering the church property to the administration of a civil
commission. They thus indeed secured thoroughly ultramontane
elections, but at the same time put themselves into a position of self-contradiction,
and admitted that the one ground of their opposition
to the May Laws, that they were one-sidedly wrought by the state,
was null and void.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>Papal Overtures for Peace.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Leo XIII.</emph>, since 1878, intimated his
accession to the Emperor William, and expressed his regret at finding
that the good relations did not continue which formerly existed
between Prussia and the holy see. The Emperor's answer expressed
the hope that by the aid of his Holiness the Prussian bishops might
be induced to obey the laws of the land, as the people under their
pastoral care actually did; and afterwards while in consequence of
the attempt on his life of June 2nd, 1873, he lay upon a sickbed, the
crown prince on June 10th answered other papal communications by
saying, that no Prussian monarch could entertain the wish to change
the constitution and laws of his country in accordance with the ideas
of the Romish church; but that, even though a thorough understanding
upon the radical controversy of a thousand years could not
be reached, yet the endeavour to preserve a conciliatory disposition
on both sides would also for Prussia open a way to peace which had
never been closed in other states. Three weeks later the Munich
nuntio Masella was at Kissingen and conferred with the chancellor,
Prince Bismarck, who was residing there, about the possibility of a
basis of reconciliation. Subsequently negotiations were continued at
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
Gastein, and then in Vienna with the there resident nuntio Jacobini,
but were suspended owing to demands by the curia to which the
state could not submit. Still the pope attempted indirectly to open
the way for renewed consultation, for he issued a brief dated February
24th, 1880, to <q>Archbishop Melchers of Cologne</q> (deposed by
the royal court of justice), in which he declared his readiness to allow
to the respective government boards notification of new elected priests
before their canonical institution. Thereupon a communication was
sent to Cardinal Jacobini that the state ministry had resolved, so
soon as the pope had actually implemented this declaration of his
readiness, to make every effort to obtain from the state representatives
authority to set aside or modify those enactments of the May Laws
which were regarded by the Romish church as harsh. But the pope
received this compromise of the government very ungraciously and
showed his dissatisfaction by withdrawing his concession, which
besides referred only to the unremovable priests, therefore not to
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Hetzkaplane</foreign> and succursal or assistant priests, and presupposed the
obtaining the <q><foreign rend='italic'>agrément</foreign>,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the willingly accorded consent, of the
state, without by any means allowing the setting aside of the party
elected.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_10'/>
10. <emph>Proof of the Prussian Government's willingness to be Reconciled,
1880-1881.</emph>&mdash;Notwithstanding this brusque refusal on the part of the
papal curia, the government, at the instance of the minister of public
worship, Von Puttkamer (<ref target='Section_193_Para_6'>§ 193, 6</ref>), resolved in May, 1880, to introduce
a bill which gave a wide discretionary power for moderating the unhappy
state of matters that had prevailed since the passing of the
May Laws, throughout Catholic districts, where 601 pastorates stood
wholly vacant and 584 partly so, and nine bishoprics, some by death
and others by deposition. Although the need of peace was readily
admitted on both sides, the Liberals opposed these <q>Canossa proposals</q>
as far too great; the Centre, Poles, and Guelphs as far too small. Yet
it obtained at last in a form considerably modified, through a compromise
of the conservatives with a great part of the national liberals
the consent of both chambers. This law, sanctioned on July 14th,
1880, embraced these provisions: 1. The royal court shall no longer
depose from office any church officers, but simply pronounce incapable
of administering the office; 2-4. The ministry of the state is authorized
to give the episcopal administrator charged by the church with
the interim administration of a vacant bishopric a dispensation from
the taking of the prescribed oath; further, an administration by
commission of ecclesiastical property may be revoked as well as appointed;
also state endowments that had been withdrawn are to be
restored for the benefit of the whole extent of the diocese; 5. Spiritual
official acts of a duly appointed clergyman by way merely of assistance
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
in another vacant parish are to be allowed; 6. The minister of
the interior and of public worship are empowered to approve of the
erection of new institutions of religious societies which are devoted
wholly to the care of the sick, as to allow revocably to them the care
and nurture of children not yet of school age; and more recently added
were 7, the particular, according to which Articles 2, 3, and 4 cease
to operate after January 1st, 1882. The government was particularly
careful to carry out the provisions temporarily recognised in Article
3, for the restoration of orderly episcopal administration by regularly
elected episcopal administrators in bishoprics made vacant by death.
Fulda, which was longest vacant, from October, 1873, had to be left
out of account, since in that case there was only one member of the
chapter left and so a canonical election was impossible. But without
difficulty in March, 1881, the Vicar-General Dr. Höting for Osnabrück
and Canon Drobe for Paderborn, without taking the oath of allegiance,
succeeded in obtaining independent administration of the property
as well as the restoration of state pay for the entire dioceses, though
they did not give the notification required by the May Laws for the
interim administration. In October, 1881, the deposed Prince Bishop
Förster of Breslau died, and the suffragan bishop, Gleich, elected by
the chapter, undertook with consent of the government the office of
episcopal administrator.&mdash;Meanwhile the pope, by a hearty letter of
congratulation to the emperor on his birthday, March 22nd, had given
new life to the suspended peace negotiations. And now also, when
the respective chapters transferred their right of election to the pope,
the orderly appointments of the Canon Dr. Korum of Metz, a pupil
of the Jesuit faculty of Innspruck, very warmly recommended by Von
Manteuffel, governor of Alsace and Lorraine, to the episcopal see of
Treves, in August, 1881, of Vicar-General Kopp of Hildesheim to Fulda
in December, 1881, of the episcopal administrators Höting and Drobe,
in March and May, 1882, respectively to Osnabrück and Paderborn,
were duly carried into effect. For Breslau the chapter drew up a
list of seven candidates, but the government pointed out the Berlin
provost, Rob. Herzog, as a mild and conciliatory person. The chapter
now laid its right of election in the hands of the pope, and in May,
1882, Herzog was raised to the dignity of prince-bishop. There now
remained vacant only the sees of Cologne, Posen, Limburg and Münster,
which had been emptied by the depositions of the civil courts.&mdash;Meanwhile,
too, the negotiations carried on at the instance of the
government by privy councillor Von Schlözer, with the curia at Rome
for the restoration of the embassy to the Vatican had been brought to
a close. The chamber voted for this purpose an annual sum of 90,000
marks, and Schlözer himself was appointed to the post in March,
1882.
</p>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_11'/>
11. <emph>Conciliatory Negotiations, 1882-1884.</emph>&mdash;With January 1st, 1882,
the three enactments of the July law of 1880, which might be enforced
at the discretion of the government, ceased to operate. Von
Gossler, minister of public worship since June, 1881, on behalf of
government, introduced a new bill into the Chamber on January 16th,
1882, for their re-enactment and extension, which by a compromise
between the Conservatives and the Centre, after various modifications
secured a majority in both houses. This second revised law embraced
the following points: 1. Renewal of the three above-named enactments
till April 1st, 1884; 2. Restoration of the <q>Bishop's Paragraph,</q>
lost in 1880, in this new form: If the king has pardoned a
bishop set aside by the ecclesiastical court, he becomes again the
bishop of his diocese recognised by the state; 3. The setting aside of
the examination in general knowledge (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturexamen</foreign>) for those who
bring a certificate of having passed the Gymnasium exit examination,
or have attended with diligence lectures on philosophy, history and
German literature during a three years' course at a German university,
or at a Prussian seminary of equal rank, and have given proof of
this by presenting evidence to the chief president; 4. The setting
aside of the rights of the patron and congregation of themselves filling
the vacant pastorates during a vacancy in the episcopal see. The new
law obtained royal sanction on <emph>May 31st, 1882</emph>. But its two most important
articles, 2 and 3, remained for a long time a dead letter, and
even Article 1 was only carried out by the resumption of the state
emoluments for the Hohenzollerns and the five newly instituted bishoprics
(Par. 10), but not for the other seven. But the ill humour of
the ultramontane Hotspurs was raised to the boiling point by the fate
of the bill introduced by the Centre into the Reichstag to set aside the
Expatriation Law of May 4th, 1874, which seemed to the government
indispensable on account of its applicability to the agitations against
the empire of the Polish clergy. This bill, after violent debates, was
carried on January 18th, 1882, by a two-thirds majority; but it was
cast out by the Federal Council on June 6th, almost unanimously,
only Bavaria and Reuss <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>jüngere Linie</foreign> voting in its favour. This was
the result mainly of the failure of all the attempts of Von Schlözer to
render the government's concessions acceptable to the papal curia.&mdash;On
the other hand, the government of its own accord brought in a
third revision scheme in June, 1883, by which it sought to relieve as
far as possible the troubles of the Catholic church. By adopting this
law: (1) The obligation of notification on the part of the bishops and
the right of the state to protest on the change of temporary assistants
and substitutes into regular spiritual officers, were abolished; as also (2)
the competence of the court for ecclesiastical affairs in appeals against
the protest of the chief president, which now therefore, according to
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
the generally prevailing rule, are referred to the minister of worship,
the whole ministry, the parliament, the king; (3) the immunity from
punishment in the execution of their office guaranteed in Article 5
of the July law of 1880 (Par. 10) was extended to all spiritual offices
whether vacant or not; (4) the ordaining of individual candidates in
vacant dioceses by bishops recognised by the state was declared to
be legal. In spite of repeated declarations of the curia that it could
and would agree to the notification only after a previous sufficient
guarantee of perfectly free training of the clergy and free administration
of the spiritual office, the king while residing at the Castle of
Mainau on Lake Constance, on July 11th, 1883, sanctioned the so-called
Mainau Law that had passed both houses, and on the 14th, the
minister of public worship demanded that the Prussian bishops,
without making notification, should fill up vacancies in pastorates by
appointing assistants, and should name those candidates who were
eligible for such appointment under the conditions of the May Law of
the previous year (Par. 3). The pope at last, in September, 1883,
allowed the dispensation required, but for that time only and without
prejudice for the future. By the end of May, 1,884 applications
had been made to the senior of the Prussian episcopate appointed to
receive such, Marnitz of Kulm, by 1,443 clergymen, of whom the
government rejected only 178 who had studied at the Jesuit institutions
of Rome, Louvain, and Innsbrück.&mdash;In December, 1883, Bishop
Blum of Limburg, and in January, 1884, Brinkmann of Münster were
restored by royal grace, and for both dioceses, as well as for Ermeland,
Kulm and Hildesheim, and at last also on March 31st, shortly before
the closing of the door, even for Cologne, in this case, however, revocably,
the arrest of salaries ceased, so that only the two archiepiscopal
sees of Cologne and Posen remained vacant, and only Posen continued
bereft of its endowments. On the other hand the government allowed
the three discretionary enactments that were in operation till April
1st, 1884, to lapse without providing for their renewal. Also the proposal
for abolishing the Expatriation Law of November, 1884, introduced
anew by the Centre and again adopted by the Reichstag by a
great majority, was thrown out by the Federal Council; but in the
beginning of December, on the opening of the new Reichstag, it was
again brought in by the Centre and passed, but was left quite unnoticed
by the Federal Council. The repeated motions of the Centre
for payment of the bishops' salaries from the state exchequer, as well
as for immunity to those who read mass and dispensed the sacraments,
were again thrown out by the House of Deputies in April, 1885.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_12'/>
12. <emph>Resumption on both sides of Conciliatory Measures, 1885-1886.</emph>&mdash;The
next subject of negotiation with the curia was the re-institution
of the archiepiscopal see of Posen-Gnesen. In March, 1884, the pope
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
had nominated Cardinal Ledochowski secretary of the committee on
petitions, in which capacity he had to remain in Rome. He now
declared himself willing to accept Ledochowski's resignation of the
archbishopric if the Prussian government would allow a successor who
would possess the confidence of the holy see as well as of the Polish
inhabitants of the diocese. But of the three noble Polish chauvinists
submitted by the Vatican the government could accept none. Since
further no agreement could be reached on the question of the bishop's
obligation to make notification and the state's right to protest, the
negotiations were for a long time at a standstill, and were repeatedly
on the point of being broken off. But from the middle of 1885, a conciliatory
movement gained power, through the counsels of the more
moderate party among the cardinals. Archbishop Melchers, who
lived as an exile in Maestricht, was called to Rome, and as a reward
for his assistance was made cardinal, and the pope consecrated as his
successor in the archbishopric of Cologne, Bishop Krementz of Ermeland
(Par. 2), who also was acknowledged by the Prussian government
and introduced to Cologne on December 15th, 1885, with great
pomp, with 20,000 torches and twenty bands of music. After a long list
of candidates had been set aside by one side and the other, some here,
some there, the pope at last fell from his demand for one of Polish
nationality, and in March, 1886, appointed to the vacant see Julius
Dinder, dean of Königsberg, a German by nation but speaking the
Polish language.&mdash;Meanwhile at other points advance was made in
the peaceful, yea, even friendly, relations between the pope and the
Prussian government. The diplomatist Leo showed his admiring
regard for the diplomatist Bismarck by sending him a valuable oil-painting
of himself by a Münich master, and the latter astonished the
world by making the pope umpire in a threatening conflict with
Spain on the possession of the Caroline islands. His decision on the
main question was indeed in favour of Spain, but not unimportant
concessions were also made to Germany. The pope sent the prince
two Latin poems as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pretium affectionis</foreign>, and conferred upon him, the
first Protestant that had ever been so honoured, at the close of 1885
or beginning of 1886, the highest papal order, the insignia of the
Order of Christ, with brilliants, after the cardinal secretary of state
Jacobini as president of the papal court of arbitration had been rewarded
with the Prussian order of the Black Eagle, and the other
members of the court with other high Prussian orders; and at the end
of April, 1886, the German emperor sent the pope himself thanks for his
mediation, with an artistic and costly Pectoral (§ 59, 7) worth 10,000
marks.&mdash;The government had, meanwhile, on February 15th, 1886,
brought in a new proposal of revision of church polity, the fourth, and
in order to secure the advice of a distinguished representative of the
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
Prussian episcopate, called Bishop Kopp of Fulda to the House of
Peers. But as his demands for concessions, suggested to him, not by
the pope, but by the Centre, went far beyond what was proposed, they
were for the most part decidedly opposed by the minister of worship
and rejected by the house. The law confirmed by the king on May
24th, 1886, made the following changes: Complete abolition of the
examination in general culture; freeing of the seminaries recognised
by the minister as suitable for clerical training, as well as faculties
established in universities, seminaries and gymnasia from any special
state inspection (as laid down in the May Laws), and subjecting such
to the common laws affecting all similar educational institutions.
Removal of restrictions requiring ecclesiastical disciplinary procedure
to be only before German ecclesiastical courts; Abolition of the
Court for Ecclesiastical Affairs and transference of its functions partly
to the ministry of worship, which now as court of appeal in matters
of church discipline dealt only with those cases which entailed a loss
or reduction of official income, partly to the Berlin supreme court,
which has jurisdiction in case of a breach of the law of the state by a
church officer as well as in case of a refusal to fulfil the oath of obedience;
The discretionary enactments of the government of 1880 (Par.
10) are again enforced and the modifications of these in Article 6 of
that law are extended to all other institutions engaged on the home
propaganda; All reading of private masses and dispensing of sacraments
are no longer subjected to the infliction of penalties.&mdash;Some
weeks before royal sanction was given to this law, Cardinal Jacobini
had, at the instance of the pope, expressed his profound satisfaction
with the success of the advice in the House of Peers, as also particularly
at the prospect of other concessions promised by the government.
In an official communication to the president of the House of
Deputies, he proposed the addition that the notification of new appointments
to vacant pastorates should begin from that date. In August
there followed, on the part of the government, the hitherto refused
dispensation for those trained by the Jesuits in Rome and Innsbrück,
and in November, with consent of the minister of public worship,
the re-opening of the episcopal seminaries at Fulda and Treves.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_13'/>
13. <emph>Definitive Conclusion of Peace, 1887.</emph>&mdash;In February, 1887, the state
journal published a new form of oath for the bishops, sanctioned by
royal ordinance, in which the obligation hitherto enforced <q>to conscientiously
observe the laws of the state,</q> was omitted, and the asseveration
added, <q>that I have not, by the oath, taken to his Holiness
the pope and the church, undertaken any obligation which can be in
conflict with the oath of fidelity as a subject of his Royal Majesty.</q>&mdash;The
promised fifth revision, meanwhile accepted by the pope in its
several particulars and acknowledged by him as sufficient basis for a
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
definitive peace, was on February 13th, 1887, contrary to precedent, first
laid before the House of Peers. Bishop Kopp proposed a great number
of changes and additions, of which several of a very important nature
were accepted. The most important provisions of this law, which was
passed on <emph>April 29th, 1887</emph>, are the following: The obligation on bishops
to make notification applies only to the conferring of a spiritual office
for life, and the right of protest by the state must rely upon a basis
named and belonging to the civil domain; All state compulsion to
lifelong reinstatement in a vacant office is unlawful; The previously
insured immunity for reading mass and dispensing the sacraments is
now applied to members of all spiritual orders again allowed in the
kingdom; The duty of ecclesiastical superiors to communicate disciplinary
decisions to the Chief President is given up. Those orders
and congregations which devote themselves to aiding in pastoral work,
the administering of Christian benevolence, and, on Bishop Kopp's
motion, those which engage in educational work in girl's high schools
and similar institutions, as well as those which lead a private life, are
to be allowed and are to be also restored to the enjoyment of their
original possessions; The training of missionaries for foreign work
and the erection of institutions for this purpose are to be permitted to
the privileged orders and congregations.&mdash;Bishop Kopp, and also the
pope, with lively gratitude, accepted these ordinances as making the
reconciliation an accomplished fact; but they also expressed the hope
that the success of this peaceful arrangement will be such as shall
lead to further important concessions to the rightful claims of the
Catholic church. After this conclusive revision, besides the extremely
contracted obligation of notification by the bishops and the almost
completely insignificant right of civil protest, there remain of the
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign> laws only: the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kanzelparagraph</foreign>, the Jesuit and the
exile enactments (all of them imperial and not Prussian laws), and the
abrogation of the three articles of the Prussian constitution (Par. 8).
Insignificant as the concessions of the papal curia may seem in comparison
to the almost complete surrender of the Prussian government,
it can hardly be said that Bismarck has been untrue to his promise
not to go to Canossa. With him the main thing ever was to restore
within the German empire the peace that was threatened by thunderclouds
gathering from day to day in the political horizon in east and
west, and thus, as also by nurturing and developing the military
forces, to set aside the danger of war from without. But for this end,
the sovereignty of the Centre, which hampered him on every side,
allying itself with all elements in the Chamber and Reichstag hostile
to the government and the empire, must be broken. But this was
possible only if he succeeded in breaking up the unhallowed artificial
amalgamation of Catholic church interests for which the Centre contended
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
with the political tendencies of the party hostile to the empire
by recognising those interests in a manner satisfactory to the pope
and to all right-minded loyal German Catholics, and so estranging
them from the political schemes of the leader of the Centre. This
indeed would have scarcely been possible with Pius IX., but with the
much clearer and sharper Leo XIII. there was hope of success. And
the statesmanlike insight and self-denial of the prince succeeded,
though at first only in a limited measure, and this was a much more
important gain for the state than the papal concessions of episcopal
notification and the state's right of protest.&mdash;When in the beginning
of 1887, at the same time that the fear was greatest of a war with
France and Russia, the renewal and enlargement of the military
budget, hitherto for seven years, was necessary, and its refusal by the
Centre and its adherents was regarded as certain, Bismarck prevailed
on the pope to intervene in his favour. The pope did it in a confidential
communication to the president of the Centre, in which he urged
acceptance of the septennial act in the Reichstag for the security of
the Fatherland and the conserving of peace on the continent, expressly
referring to the friendly and promising attitude of the imperial
government to the papacy and the Catholic church. But the president
kept the communication secret from the members of his party, and
they continued strenuously and unanimously opposed to the Septennate.
The Reichstag was consequently dissolved. The pope now published
this correspondence with the leaders of the Centre, thirty-seven Rhenish
nobles separated from the party, and the new elections to the Reichstag
were mainly favourable to the government. Although the Deputy
Windthorst as chief leader of the Prussian <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ecclesia militans</foreign> had on
every occasion protested his and his party's profoundest reverence for
and conditional submission to every expression of the papal will, and
shortly before (<ref target='Section_186_Para_3'>§ 186, 3</ref>) had styled the pope <q>Lord of the whole
world,</q> he opposed himself, as he had done on the Septennate question,
on the fifth revision of the ecclesiastical laws, to the will of the infallible
pope by publishing a memorial proving the absolute impossibility
of accepting this proposed law, which, however, this time also he failed
to carry out.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_14'/>
14. <emph>Independent Procedure of the other German Governments.</emph>&mdash;(1)
<emph>Bavaria's</emph> energy in the struggle against ultramontanism (Par. 4) soon
cooled. Yet in 1873 the Redemptorists were instructed to discontinue
their missionary work (<ref target='Section_186_Para_6'>§ 186, 6</ref>), and all theological students were
forbidden to attend the Jesuit German College at Rome (§ 151, 1).
Also in 1875, the jubilee processions organized by the episcopate
without obtaining the royal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> were inhibited.&mdash;(2) <emph>Württemberg</emph>,
which since 1862 possessed more civil jurisdiction over Catholic church
affairs and exercised it more freely (<ref target='Section_196_Para_6'>§ 196, 6</ref>) than Prussia laid claim
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
to in 1873, could all the more easily maintain ecclesiastical peace,
since its peaceful Bishop Hefele (§ 189, <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_189_Para_4'>4</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>) avoided all
occasion of conflict and strife.&mdash;(3) In <emph>Baden</emph> the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign> that
had here previously broken out (<ref target='Section_196_Para_2'>§ 196, 2</ref>) was continued all the more
keenly. In 1873 public teaching, holding of missions and assisting
in pastoral work, had been refused to all religious orders and fraternities.
But the main blow, followed by the comprehensive church
legislation of February 19th, 1874, which closed all boys' seminaries
and episcopal institutions, allowed none to hold a clerical office or
discharge any ecclesiastical function without a three years' course at
a German university and a state examination in general culture
(<ref target='Section_196_Para_2'>§ 196, 2</ref>), strictly forbad all influencing of public elections by the
clergy, and made deposition follow the second conviction of a church
officer. The expedient hitherto resorted to of appointing mere deputy
priests so as to avoid the examination, was consequently frustrated.
The rapid increase of vacant pastorates, after five years' opposition, at
last moved the episcopal curia to sue for peace at the hands of the
government, and when the latter showed an exceedingly conciliatory
spirit, the curia with consent of the pope in February, 1880, withdrew
its prohibition of the request for dispensation from the state examination,
and the government now on its part with the Chambers passed
a law, by which the obligation to undergo this examination was
abolished, and the certificate of the exit examination, three years'
attendance at a German university, and diligent attention to at least
three courses of the philosophical faculty, was held as sufficient
evidence of general culture. The Baden <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign> seems to have
been definitely concluded by the election and recognition of Dr. Orbin
to the see of Freiburg, vacant for fourteen years, when he without
scruple took the oath of allegiance. This, however, did not check, far
less put an end to the tumults of the fanatical ultramontane Irredenta.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_197_Para_15'/>
15.&mdash;(4) <emph>Hesse-Darmstadt</emph> in 1874 followed the example of Prussia
and Baden in excluding all spiritual orders from teaching in public
schools, and on April 23rd, 1875, issued five ecclesiastical laws which
were directed to restoring under penal sanctions the state of the
law, which before 1850 (<ref target='Section_196_Para_4'>§ 196, 4</ref>) had been unquestioned. Essentially
in harmony with the Prussian May Laws of 1873 and 1874, they go
beyond these in several particulars. All clergymen receiving appointments,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, must have gone through a full university course; all
religious orders and congregations were to be allowed to die out;
public roads and squares could be used for ecclesiastical festivals only
by permission of the government to be renewed on each occasion.
The <q>contentious</q> Bishop Ketteler of Mainz, who stirred up the fire
to the utmost with the Prussian brand, and had kindled also a similar
flame in Hesse over the proposal of this law, held still that to view
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
martyrdom at a distance was the better part, and carefully avoided
any overt act of disobedience. But he immediately refused to co-operate
in restoring the Catholic theological faculty at Giessen, and
the government consequently abandoned the idea. The Mainz see after
Ketteler's death in 1877 remained long vacant, as the government felt
obliged to reject the electoral list submitted by the chapter. A candidate
satisfactory to the Vatican and the government was only found
in May, 1886, in the person of Dr. Haffner, a member of the chapter.
After Prussia had concluded its definitive peace with Rome, the Hessian
government, in May, 1887, laid before the house of representatives a
revision of ecclesiastical legislation of 1875, like that of Prussia, only
not going so far, for which meanwhile the approval of the papal curia
had been obtained. It agrees to the erection of a Catholic clerical
seminary, and Catholic students' residences in this seminary and in
the state-gymnasia; erection of independent boys' institutions preparatory
to the seminary for priests is, however, still refused; the existing
duty of bishops to make notification, and the right of the state to
protest in regard to appointments to vacant pastorates are also
retained. There is no word of rehabilitating religious orders and
congregations, nor of any limitation of the law about the exercise of
ecclesiastical punishment and means of discipline.&mdash;(5) Last of all
among the German states affected by the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign>, the kingdom
of <emph>Saxony</emph>, with only 73,000 Catholic inhabitants, at the instance of
the second Chamber in 1876, came forward with a Catholic church
law modelled upon the Prussian May Laws, with its several provisions
modified, in spite of the contention of the talented heir to the throne,
Prince George, that the power of the state in relation to the Catholic
church could only be determined by a concordat with the Roman
curia.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_198'/>
<head>§ 198. Austria-Hungary.</head>

<p>
To the emperor of Austria there was left, after the re-organization
of affairs by the Vienna Congress, of the Roman
empire, only the name of defender of the papal see, and the
Catholic church, and the presidency of the German Federal
Council. The remnants of the Josephine ecclesiastical constitution
were gradually set aside and Catholicism firmly
established as the state religion; yet the government
asserted its independence against all hierarchical claims,
and granted, though only in a very limited degree, toleration
to Protestantism. The revolution year 1848 removed
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
indeed some of these limits, but the period of reaction that
followed gave, by means of a concordat concluded with the
curia in 1855, to the ultramontane hierarchy of the country
an unprecedented power in almost all departments of civil
life, and prejudicial also to the interests of the Protestant
church. After the disastrous issue of the Italian war in
1859, and still more that of the German war in 1866, the
government was obliged to make an honest effort to introduce
and develop liberal institutions. And after an
imperial patent of 1861 had secured religious liberty, self-administration,
and equal rights to the Protestant church,
the constitutional legislation of 1868 freed Catholic as well
as Protestant civil, educational, and ecclesiastical matters
from the provisions of the concordat that most seriously
threatened them, and by the declaration of papal infallibility
in 1870 the government felt justified in regarding the entire
concordat as antiquated and declaring it abolished. In its
place a Catholic church act was passed by the state in 1874.
But the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign> struggle which was thus made imminent
also for Austria was avoided by pliancy on both sides.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_198_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Zillerthal Emigration.</emph>&mdash;In the Tyrolese <emph>Zillerthal</emph> the knowledge
of evangelical truth had spread among several families by means
of Protestant books and Bibles. When the Catholic clergy from 1826
had pushed to its utmost the clerical guardianship by means of
auricular confession, an opposition arose which soon from the refusal
to confess passed on to the rejection of saint worship, masses for the
dead, purgatory, indulgences, etc., and ended in the formal secession
of many to the evangelical church in 1830, with a reference to the
Josephine edict of toleration. The emperor Francis I., to whom on
the occasion of his visit to Innsbrück in 1832 they presented their
petition, promised them toleration. But the Tyrolese nobles protested,
and the official decision, given at last in 1834, ordered removal to
Transylvania or return to the Catholic church. The petitioners now
applied, as those of Salzburg had previously done (<ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>§ 165, 4</ref>), by a
deputation to the king of Prussia, who, after by diplomatic communications
securing the emperor's consent to emigration, assigned them
his estate of Erdmannsdorf in Silesia for colonization. There now the
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
exiles, 399 in number, settled in 1837, and, largely aided by the royal
munificence, founded a new Zillerthal.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_198_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Concordat.</emph>&mdash;After the revolution year 1848, the government
were far more yielding toward the claims of the hierarchy than under
the old Metternich <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>régime</foreign>. In April, 1850, an imperial patent relieved
the papal and episcopal decrees of the necessity of imperial approval,
and on August 18th, 1855, a concordat with the pope was agreed to,
by which unprecedented power and independence was granted to the
hierarchy in Austria for all time to come. The first article secured
to the Roman Catholic religion throughout the empire all rights and
privileges which they claimed by divine institution and the canon
law. The others gave to the bishops the right of unrestricted correspondence
with Rome, declared that no papal ordinance required any
longer the royal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign>, that prelates are unfettered in the discharge
of their hierarchical obligations, that religious instruction in all
schools is under their supervision, that no one can teach religion or
theology without their approval, that in catholic schools there can be
only catholic teachers, that they have the right of forbidding all
books which may be injurious to the faithful, that all cases of ecclesiastical
law, especially marriage matters, belong to their jurisdiction,
yet the apostolic see grants that purely secular law matters of the
clergy are to be decided before a civil tribunal, and the emperor's
right of nomination to vacant episcopal sees is to continue, etc. The
inferior clergy, who were now without legal protection against the
prelates, only reluctantly bowed their necks to this hard yoke; the
liberal Catholic laity murmured, sneered, and raged, and the native
press incessantly urged a revision of the concordat, the necessity of
which became ever more apparent from concessions made meanwhile
willingly or grudgingly to the <q>Non-Catholics.</q> But only after
Austria, by the issue of the German war of 1866, was restricted to her
own domain, and finally freed from the drag of its ultramontane
Italian interests, found herself obliged to make every effort to reconcile
the opposing parties within her own territories, could these
views prove successful. But since the government nevertheless held
firmly by the principle that the concordat, as a state contract regularly
concluded between two sovereigns, could be changed only by mutual
consent, the liberal majority of the house of deputies resolved to make
it as harmless as possible by means of domestic legislation, and on
June 11th, 1867, the deputy Herbst moved the appointment of a
committee for drawing up three bills for restoring civil marriage,
emancipation of schools from the church, and equality of all confessions
in the eye of the law. The motion was carried by a hundred
and thirty-four votes against twenty-two. The Cisleithan (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
Austrian excluding Hungary) episcopate, with Cardinal Rauscher of
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
Vienna at their head, presented an address to his apostolic majesty
demanding the most rigid preservation of the concordat, denouncing
civil marriage as concubinage, and the emancipation of schools as
their dechristianizing. An imperial autograph letter to Rauscher
rebuked with earnest words the inflammatory proceedings of the
bishops, and at the same time the ultramontane ambassador to Rome,
Baron Hübner, was recalled. After the arrangement with Hungary
was completed, the first Cisleithan, the so-called Burger, ministry was
constituted under the presidency of Prince Auersperg, composed of
the most distinguished leaders of the parliamentary majority. All
the three bills were passed by a large majority, and obtained imperial
sanction on <emph>May 25th, 1868</emph>. The papal nuncio of Vienna protested,
the pope in an allocution denounced the new Austrian constitution as
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nefanda sane</foreign> and the three confessional laws as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>abominabiles leges</foreign>.
<q>We repudiate and condemn these laws,</q> he says, <q>by apostolic
authority, as well as everything done by the Austrian government in
matters of church policy, and determine in the exercise of the same
authority that these decrees with all their consequences are and shall
be null and void.</q> But all Vienna, all Austria held jubilee, and the
Chancellor von Beust rejected with energy the assumptions of the
curia over the civil domain. The bishops indeed issued protests and
inflammatory pastorals, and forbad the publication of the marriage
act, but submitted to the threats of compulsion by the supreme court,
and Bishop Rudigier of Linz, who went furthest in inciting to opposition,
was in 1869 taken into court by the police, and sentenced to
twelve days' imprisonment, but pardoned by the emperor. Toward
the Vatican Council Austria assumed at first a waiting policy, then
in vain remonstrated, warned, threatened, and finally, on July 30th,
1870, after the proclamation of infallibility, declared that the concordat
was antiquated and abolished, because by this dogma the
position of one of the contracting parties had undergone a complete
change.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_198_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Protestant Church in Cisleithan Austria.</emph>&mdash;Down to 1848 Protestantism
of both confessions in Austria enjoyed only a very limited
toleration. The storms of this year first set aside the hated official
name of <q>Non-Catholics,</q> and won permission for Protestant places
of worship to have bells and towers. But the repeated petitions for
permission to found branches of the <emph>Gustavus Adolphus Union</emph>, the
persistently maintained law that Catholic clergymen, even after they
had formally become Protestants, could not marry, because the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>character indelibilis</foreign> of priestly consecration attached itself even to
apostates, and many such facts, prove that the government was far
from intending to grant to the Protestants civil equality with the
Catholics. But the unfortunate result of the Sardinian-French war
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
of 1859, and the fear thereby increased of the falling asunder of the
whole Austrian federation, induced the government to address itself
earnestly to the introduction of liberal institutions, and also to do
justice to the Protestant church. The presidency of the two Protestant
consistories in Vienna, hitherto given to a Catholic, was now
assigned to a Protestant; meetings of the Gustavus Adolphus Union
were now allowed, and a share was given to the Protestant party in
the ministry of public worship by the appointment of three evangelical
councillors. After the entrance on office of the liberal minister
Von Schmerling, an imperial patent was issued on April 8th, 1864,
by which unrestricted liberty of faith, independent administration of
all ecclesiastical, educational, and charitable matters, free election of
pastors, even from abroad, full exercise of civil and political rights,
and complete equality with Catholics was given to the Protestants
of the German and Slavonian crown territories. Also in 1868, under
the reactionary ministry of Belcredi, on the expiry of the legal term
of the Evangelical Supreme Church Council, it was reorganized, two
evangelical school councillorships were created, and the pecuniary
position of the evangelical clergy considerably improved. But in
spite of all privileges legally granted to the evangelical church, it
continued in many cases, in presence of the concordat, which down
to 1870 still remained in force, exposed to the whims and caprice,
sometimes of the imperial courts, sometimes of the Catholic clergy.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_198_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Clerical Landtag Opposition in the Tyrol.</emph>&mdash;In the <emph>Tyrol</emph>, after
the publication of the imperial patent of April, 1861, a violent movement
was set on foot by clerical agitation. The Landtag, by a great
majority, pronounced the issuing of it the most serious calamity which
the country, hitherto honest, true, and happy in its undivided attachment
to the Catholic faith, could have suffered, and concluded that
Non-Catholics in the Tyrol should only by way of dispensation be
allowed, but that publicity of Protestant worship and formation of
Protestant congregations should be still forbidden. The Schmerling
ministry, indeed, refused to confirm these resolutions. The agitation
of the clergy, however, which fanned in all possible ways the fanaticism
of the people, grew from year to year, until at last the Belcredi
ministry of 1866 came to an agreement with the Landtag, sanctioned
by the emperor, according to which the creation of an evangelical
landed proprietary in the Tyrol was not indeed formally forbidden,
but permission for an evangelical to possess land had in each case to
be obtained from the Landtag. The ecclesiastical laws of 1868 next
called forth new conflicts. Twice was the Landtag closed because
of the opposition thus awakened, until finally in September, 1870,
the estates took the oath to the new constitution with reservation of
conscience. But now, when in December, 1875, the ministry of
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
worship gave approval to the formal constituting of two evangelical
congregations in the Tyrol, at Innsbrück and Meran, the clerical
press was filled with burning denunciations, and the majority of the
Landtag meeting in the following March thought to give emphasis
to their protest by leaving the chamber, and so bringing the assembly
to a sudden close. In June, 1880, the three bishops of the Tyrol
uttered in the Landtag a fanatical protest against the continuance of
the meanwhile established congregations, which the Landtag majority
renewed in July, 1883.
</p>

<p>
5. <emph>The Austrian Universities.</emph>&mdash;Stremayr, minister of public worship,
introduced in 1872 a scheme of university reorganization, by which
the exclusively Catholic character which had hitherto belonged to
the Austrian universities, especially those of Vienna and Prague,
should be removed. Up to this time a Non-Catholic could there
obtain no sort of academical degree, but this was now to be obtainable
apart from any question of confession. The office of chancellor,
held by the archbishops of Prague and Vienna, was restricted to the
theological faculty, to the state was assigned the right of nominating
all professors, even in the theological faculty, and the German language
was recommended as the medium of instruction. Candidates
of theology have to pass through a full and comprehensive course of
theological science in a three years' university curriculum, before
they can be admitted into an episcopal seminary for practical training.
In spite of the opposition of the superior clergy, the bill passed
even in the House of Peers, and became law in 1873.&mdash;In Innsbrück,
where according to ancient custom the rector was chosen from the
four faculties in succession, the other faculties protested against
the election when, in 1872, the turn came to the theological (Jesuit)
faculty, and they carried their point. The new organization law
gave the choice of rector to the whole professoriate, and a subsequent
imperial order withdrew from the general of the Jesuits the right of
nominating all theological professors.&mdash;Much was done, too, for the
elevation of the evangelical theological faculty in Vienna by bringing
able scholars from Germany, by giving a right to the promotion to
the degree of doctor of theology, etc. But its incorporation in the
university, though often moved for, was hindered by the continued
opposition of the Catholic theologians as well as philosophers, and in
1873 it did not meet with sufficient support in the House of Peers.
Even the use of certain halls in the university buildings, promised by
the minister, could not yet be obtained.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_198_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The Austrian Ecclesiastical Laws, 1874-1876.</emph>&mdash;At last the government
in January, 1874, introduced the long-promised Catholic church
legislation into the Reichstag, intended to supply blanks occasioned
by the setting aside of the concordat. Its main contents are these:
</p>

<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>

<p>
I. The concordat, hitherto only diplomatically dealt with, is now
legislatively annulled; the bishops have to present all their manifestoes
not before but upon publication to the state government for
its cognisance; every vacancy of an ecclesiastical office, as well as
every new appointment to such, is to be notified to the civil court,
which can raise objections against such appointment within thirty
days; the minister of worship then decides on the admissibility or
inadmissibility of the candidate; legal deposition of a church officer
involves withdrawal of the emoluments; the performance of unusual
practices in public worship of a demonstrative character can be
prohibited by the civil court; any misuse of ecclesiastical authority
in restraining any one from obeying the laws of the land or from
exercising his civil rights is strictly interdicted. II. The ecclesiastical
revenues and the income of the cloisters are subjected to a progressive
taxation on behalf of a religious fund, mainly for improving the
condition of the lower clergy, for which the episcopate hitherto, in
spite of all entreaties, had done practically nothing. III. Newly
formed religious societies received state recognition if their denomination
and principles contain nothing contrary to law and morality or
offensive to those of another faith. IV. The state grants or refuses its
approval of the establishment of spiritual orders, congregations, and
ecclesiastical societies; institutions and legacies for them amounting
to over three thousand gulden require state sanction; any member is
free to quit any order; all orders must report annually on the personal
changes and disciplinary punishments that have taken place; at any
time when occasion calls for it they may be subjected to a visitation
by the civil court.<note place='foot'>The Austrian May Laws were in some respects more sweeping
than the Prussian (<ref target='Section_197_Para_5'>§ 197, 5</ref>); but the former were framed with reference
to the police, the latter with reference to the law. In Prussia
the decision, judgment, and sentence in all cases of contravention and
collision were assigned to the court of law; in Austria they were
assigned to the court of administration, in the last instance to the
minister. The Austrian laws could thus be urged and ignored at
pleasure.</note>&mdash;In vain did the pope by an encyclical seek to
rouse the episcopate to violent opposition, in vain did he adjure the
emperor in a letter in his own hand not to suffer the church to be put
into such disgraceful bondage; the House of Deputies approved the
four bills, and the emperor in <emph>May, 1874</emph>, confirmed at least the first
three, while the fourth was being debated in the House of Peers. The
bishops now issued a joint declaration that they could obey these
laws only in so far as they <q>were in harmony with the demands of
justice as stated in the concordat.</q> But it did not go to the length
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
of actual conflict. Neither to the pope and episcopate, nor to the
government was such a thing convenient at the time. Hence the
attitude of reserve on both sides, which kept everything as it had
been. And when notwithstanding Bishop Rudigier of Linz, threatened
with fines on account of his refusal to notify the newly appointed
priests, appealed to the pope, he obtained through the Vienna nuncio
permission to yield on this point, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non dissentit tolerari posse</foreign>.</q> But
all the more urgently did the nuncio strive to prevent the passing of
the sweeping cloister law. In January, 1876, it was passed in the
House of Peers with modifications, to which, however, the emperor
refused his assent. Also the revised marriage law of the same date,
which removed the hindrances to marriage incorporated even in the
book of civil law, and no longer recognised differences of religion,
Christians and non-Christians, the remarriage of separated parties of
whom at the time of the first marriage only one party belonged to the
Catholic church, higher consecration and the vows of orders, did not
pass the House of Peers.
</p>

<p>
7. <emph>The Protestant Church in the Transleithan Provinces.</emph>&mdash;In <emph>Hungary</emph>
since 1833 the Reichstag had by bold action won for the Protestants
full equality with the Catholics, but in consequence of the revolution,
the military lordship of the Protestant Haynau in 1850 again put in
fetters all independent life in both Protestant churches. The Haynau
decree was, indeed, again abrogated in 1854, but full return to the
earlier autonomy of the church, in spite of all petitions and deputations,
could never be regained, all the less as Hungary in all too
decided a manner rejected the constitutional proposals submitted by
the Government in 1856. The liberal imperial patent of September
1st, 1859, which secured independent administration and development
to the Protestant church in the crown possessions of Hungary, got
no better reception. In the German-Slavonian districts of North
Hungary, as well as in Croatia, Slavonia, and Austrian Servia, it was
greeted with jubilation and gratitude, but the Magyar Hungarians
declined on many, for the most part frivolous, grounds, mainly because
it emanated from the emperor, and did not originate in an autonomous
synod. When the government showed its intention of going
forward with it, the opposition was carried to the utmost extreme, so
that the emperor was obliged temporarily to suspend proceedings in
May, 1860. Still the ecclesiastical joined with the political movement
continued to increase until in 1867 the imperial chancellor, Von Beust,
succeeded in quieting both for a time by the Hungarian Agreement.
On June 8th of that year, the emperor, Francis Joseph, on ratifying
the agreement, was solemnly crowned King of Hungary. The hated
patent had been shortly before revoked by an imperial edict, with the
direction to order church matters in a constitutional way. After a
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
complete reconciliation, at a General Protestant Convention in December,
1867, with the Patent congregations, hitherto denounced as
unpatriotic, it was concluded that to the state belonged only a right
of protection and oversight of the church, which is autonomous in all
its internal affairs, but to all confessions perfect freedom in law, and
that there should be not a separate religious legislation for each, but
a common one for all confessions. A committee first appointed in
1873 for this purpose, with the motto, <q>A Free Church in a Free
State,</q> constituted, and then adjourned <foreign rend='italic'>ad kalendas Græcas</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_199'/>
<head>§ 199. Switzerland.</head>

<p>
The Catholic church of Switzerland, after long continued
troubles, obtained again a regular hierarchical organization
in 1828. Since that time the Jesuits settled there in crowds,
and assumed to themselves in most of the Catholic cantons
the whole direction of church and schools. The unfortunate
issue of the cantonal war of 1847 led indeed to their
banishment by law, but, favoured by the bishops, they
knew how still to re-enter by back doors and secretly to
regain their earlier influence. The city of Calvin was the
centre of their plots, not only for Switzerland, but also for all
Cisalpine Europe, until at last the overstrained bow broke,
and the Swiss governments became the most decided and
uncompromising opponents of the ultramontane claims. In
1873 the papal nuncio, in consequence of a papal encyclical
insulting the government, was banished.&mdash;In Protestant
Switzerland, besides the destructive influence of the Illumination,
antagonistic to the church, and radical liberalism,
there appeared a soil receptive of pietism, separatism, and
fanaticism, whose first cultivation has been ascribed to
Madame Krüdener (<ref target='Section_176_Para_2'>§ 176, 2</ref>). In the Protestant church of
German Switzerland the religious and theological developments
stood regularly in lively connexion with similar
movements in Germany, while those in the French cantons
received their impulse and support from France and England.
From France, to which they were allied by a common
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
language, they learned the unbelief of the encyclopædists
(<ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>§ 165, 14</ref>), while travelling Englishmen and those residing
in the country for a longer period introduced the fervour and
superstition of Methodism and other sects.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_199_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Catholic Church in Switzerland till 1870.</emph>&mdash;The ecclesiastical
superintendence of Catholic Switzerland was previously subject to the
neighbouring foreign bishoprics. But for immediate preservation of
its interests the curia had appointed a nunciature at Lucerne in 1588.
When now, in 1814, the liberal Wessenberg (<ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>§ 187, 3</ref>), already long
suspected of heresy, was called as coadjutor to Constance, the nuncio
manœuvred with the Catholic confederates till these petitioned the
pope for the establishment of an independent and national bishopric.
But when each of the cantons interested claimed to be made the
episcopal residence negotiations were at last suspended, and in 1828
six small bishoprics were erected under immediate control of Rome.
At the end of 1833 the diocesan representatives of Basel and St. Gall
assembled in Baden to consult about the restoration of a national
Swiss Metropolitan Union and a common state church constitution
for securing church and state against the encroachments of the
Romish hierarchy. But Gregory XIV. condemned the articles of
conference here agreed upon, which would have given to Switzerland
only what other states had long possessed, as false, audacious, and
erroneous, destructive of the church, heretical, and schismatic, and
among the Catholic people a revolt was stirred up by ultramontane
fanaticism, under the influence of which the whole action was soon
frustrated. On the occasion of a revision of the constitution of the
canton of Aargau, a revolt, led by the cloisters, broke out in 1841.
But the rebels were defeated, and the grand council resolved upon
the closing of all cloisters, eight in number. Complaint made against
this at the diet was regarded as satisfied by the Aargau Agreement of
1843 restoring three nunneries. An opposition was organized against
the revision of the constitution of Canton <emph>Lucerne</emph> in 1841. The liberal
government was overthrown, and the new constitution, in which the
state insisted on its <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>placet</foreign> in ecclesiastical matters and the granting
of cantonal civil rights to those only who professed attachment to
the Roman Catholic church, was submitted to the pope for approval.
At last, in 1844, the academy of Lucerne was given over to the Jesuits,
for which Joseph Leu, the popular agitator, as member of the grand
council, had wrought unweariedly since 1839. In Canton <emph>Vaud</emph> the
parties of old or clerical and young Switzerland contended with one
another for the mastery. The latter suffered an utter defeat in 1844,
and the constitution which was then carried allowed the right of
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
public worship only to the Catholic church. In consequence of this
victory of the clerical party Catholic Switzerland with Lucerne at
its head became a main centre of ultramontanism and Jesuitism. At
the diet of 1844, indeed, Aargau, supported by numerous petitions
from the people, moved for the banishment of all Jesuits from all
Switzerland, but the majority did not consent. The Jesuit opponents
expelled from Lucerne now organized twice over a free volunteer corps
to overthrow the ultramontane government and force the expulsion
of the Jesuits, but on both occasions, in 1844 and 1845, it suffered
a sore defeat. In face of the threateningly growing increase of the
excitement, which made them fear a decisive intervention of the diet,
the Catholic cantons formed in 1845 a <emph>separate league</emph> (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sonderbund</foreign>)
for the preservation of their faith and their sovereign rights. This
proceeding, irreconcilable with the Act of Federation, led to a civil
war. The members of the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Sonderbund</foreign> were defeated, the ultramontane
governments had to resign, and the Jesuits departed in 1847. The
new Federal constitution which Switzerland adopted in 1848, secured
unconditional liberty of conscience and equality of all confessions,
and the expulsion of the Jesuits in terms of the law. But since that
time ultramontanism has gained the supremacy in Catholic Switzerland,
and in spite of the existing law against the Jesuits all the
threads of the ultramontane clerical movements in Switzerland were
in the Jesuits' hands. These were never more successful than in
Canton <emph>Geneva</emph>, where the radical democratic agitator Fazy leagued
himself closely with ultramontanism to compass the destruction of
the old Calvinistic aristocracy, and by bringing in large numbers
the lower class Catholics from the neighbouring France and Savoy
he obtained a considerable Catholic majority in the canton, and in
the capital itself made Catholics and Protestants nearly equal.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_199_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Geneva Conflict, 1870-1883.</emph>&mdash;The Catholic church of Canton
Geneva, on the founding of the six Swiss bishoprics by a papal bull,
had been incorporated <q>for all time to come,</q> after the style of the
concordat, with the bishopric of Freiburg-Lausanne. But the government
made no objection when the newly elected priest of Geneva,
Mermillod, a Jesuit of the purest water, assumed the title and rank
of an episcopal vicar-general for the whole canton. But when in 1864
the pope nominated him bishop of Hebron <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign> and auxiliary
bishop of Geneva, it made a protest. Nevertheless, when, in the following
year, Bishop Marilley of Freiburg by papal orders transferred to
him absolute power for the canton with personal responsibility, and in
1870 formally renounced all episcopal rights over it, so that the pope
now appointed the auxiliary bishop independent bishop of Geneva,
it was evident a step had been taken that could not be recalled. The
government renewed its protest and made it more vehement, in consequence
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
of which, in January, 1873, by a papal brief which was first
officially communicated to the government after it had already been
proclaimed from all Catholic pulpits, Mermillod was appointed
apostolic vicar-general with unlimited authority for Canton Geneva,
and the district was thus practically made a Catholic mission field.
A demand made of him by the state to resign this office and title and
divest himself of every episcopal function, was answered by the
declaration that he would obey God rather than man. The <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bund</foreign>
then expelled him from Federal territory until he would yield to that
demand. From Ferney, where he settled, he unceasingly stirred up
the fire of opposition among the Genevan clergy and people, but the
government decidedly rejected all protests, and by a popular vote obtained
sanction for a Catholic church law which restricted the rights
of the diocesan bishop who might reside in Switzerland, but not in
Canton Geneva, and without consent of the government could not appoint
there any episcopal vicar, and transferred the election of priests
and priests' vicars to the congregations. The next elections returned
Old Catholics, since the Roman Catholic population did not acknowledge
the law condemned by the pope and took no part in the voting.
By decision of the grand council of 1875 the abolition of all religious
corporations was next enacted, and all religious ceremonies and processions
in public streets and squares forbidden. Leo XIII. made an
attempt to still the conflict, for in 1879 he gave Bishop Marilley the
asked for discharge, and confirmed his elected successor, Cosandry,
as bishop of Freiburg, Lausanne, and Geneva, without however removing
Mermillod from his office of vicar apostolic of Geneva. But
this actually took place after the death of Cosandry in 1882 by the
appointment of Mermillod as his successor in 1883. As he now ceased
to style himself a vicar apostolic, the Federal council removed the
decree of banishment as the occasion of it had ceased, but left each
canton free as to whether or not it should accept him as bishop.
Freiburg, Neuenburg, and Vaud accepted him, and Mermillod had a
brilliant entry into Freiburg, which he made his episcopal residence.
But Geneva refused to recognise him, because it had already officially
attached itself to the Old Catholic Bishop Herzog of Berne, and
Mermillod went so far in his ostentatious love of peace as to declare
that he would not in future enter Genevan territory.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_199_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Conflict in the Diocese of Basel-Soleure, 1870-1880.</emph>&mdash;Bishop Lachat
of Soleure, whose diocese comprised the Cantons Bern, Soleure, Aargau,
Basel, Thurgau, Lucerne, and Zug, had been previously in
conflict with the diocesan conference, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the delegates of the seven
cantons entrusted with the oversight of the ecclesiastical administration,
on account of introducing the prohibited handbook on morals
of the Jesuit Gury (<ref target='Section_191_Para_9'>§ 191, 9</ref>), which ended in the closing of the
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
seminary aided by the government, and the erection of a new seminary
at his own cost. Although the diocesan conference next forbad
the proclamation of the new Vatican dogma, the bishop threatened
excommunicated Egli in Lucerne in 1871, and Geschwind in Starrkirch
in 1872, who refused. The conference ordered the withdrawal
of this unlawful act, and on the bishop's refusal, deposed him in
January, 1873. The dissenting cantons, Lucerne and Zug, indeed
declared that after as well as before they would only recognise
Lachat as lawful bishop, the chapter refused to make the required
election of administrator of the diocese, the clergy in Soleure and in
<emph>Bernese Jura</emph> without exception took the side of the bishop, as also by
means of a popular vote the great majority of Catholics in Thurgau.
But amid all this the conference did not yield in the least. Lachat
was compelled by the police to quit his episcopal residence, and withdrew
to a village in Canton Lucerne. The council of the Bernese
government resolved to recall the refractory clergy of the Jura, took
their names off the civil register and forbad them to exercise any
clerical functions. The outbreaks incited by rebel clergy in the Jura
were put down by the military, sixty-nine clergymen were exiled, and,
so far as the means allowed, replaced by liberal successors introduced
by the Old Catholic priest Herzog (<ref target='Section_190_Para_3'>§ 190, 3</ref>) in Olten. In November,
1875, permission to return home was granted to the exiles in consequence
of the revised Federal constitution of 1874, according to which
the banishment of Swiss burghers was no longer allowed. The Bernese
government felt all the more disposed to carry out this enactment of
the National Council, as it believed that it had obtained the legal means
for checking further rebellion and obstinacy among those who should
return. On January, 1874, by popular vote a law was sanctioned
reorganizing the whole ecclesiastical affairs of the <emph>Canton Bern</emph>. By it
all clergy, Catholic as well as Protestant, are ranked as civil officers,
the choice of whom rests with the congregations, the tenure of office
lasting for six years. All purely ecclesiastical affairs for the canton
rest in the last instance with a synod of the particular denomination,
for the several congregations with a church committee, both composed
of freely elected lay and clerical members. But if a dispute in a
particular congregation should arise about a synodal decree, the congregational
assembly decides on its validity or non-validity for the
particular congregation. All decrees of higher church courts and
pastorals must have state approval, which must never be refused on
dogmatic grounds. If a congregation splits over any question, the
majority claims the church property and pastor's emoluments, etc.
And this law was next extended in October 31st, 1875, in the matter
of penal law by the so-called Police Worship Law. It imposes heavy
fines up to 1000 francs or a year's imprisonment for any clerical agitation
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
against the law, institutions or enactments of the civil courts,
as well as for every outbreak of hostilities against members of other
religious bodies, refuses to allow any interference of foreign spiritual
superiors without leave granted by government in each particular
case, forbids all processions and religious ceremonies outside of the
fixed church locality, etc. In the same year the first Catholic Cantonal
Synod declared its attachment to the Christian or Old Catholic
church of Switzerland. But it was otherwise after the newly elected
Grand Council of the canton of its own accord, on September 12th,
1878, granted the returned Jura clergy complete amnesty for all the
past, and on the assumption of future submission to existing laws of
state, recognised them again eligible for election to spiritual offices
which had previously been denied them. Not only did the Roman
Catholic people regularly take part in elections of priests, church
councils, and synods, undoubtedly with the approval of the new pope
Leo XIII., who had in February addressed a conciliatory letter to the
members of the Federal Council, but also the extremest of the Jura
now submitted without scruple to the new election required by the
law, and won therein for the most part the majority of votes. In the
Catholic Cantonal Synod convened in Bern, in January, 1880, were
found seventy-five Roman Catholics and only twenty-five Old Catholic
deputies. The latter were naturally defeated in all controversies.
The synod declared that the connexion with the Christian Catholic
national bishopric was annulled, that auricular confession was obligatory,
that marriages of priests were forbidden, etc. Since now the
law assigns the state pay of the priest as well as all the church property
in the case of a split to the majority for the time being, the
inevitable consequence was that Old Catholics of the Jura district
were deprived of all share in these privileges, and had to make provision
for their own support. Also in Canton <emph>Soleure</emph>, the law that
all pastors must be re-elected after the expiry of six years, came in
force in 1872, and then the thirty-two Roman Catholic clergymen
concerned were with only two exceptions re-elected, while, on the
other hand, the Old Catholic priest Geschwind of Starrkirch was rejected.&mdash;But
all efforts to restore the bishopric of Basel-Soleure came
to grief over the person of Bishop Lachat, whom the curia would
not give up and the Federal Council would not again allow, until at
last a way out of the difficulty was found. The canton Tessin, which
previously in church matters belonged to the Italian dioceses of Milan
and Como, was, in 1859, by decree of the Federal Council, detached
from these. But Tessin insisted on the founding of a bishopric of its
own, while the Federal Council wished to join it to the bishopric of
Chur. Thus the matter remained undecided, till in September, 1884,
the papal curia came to an understanding with the Federal Council
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
that Lachat should be appointed vicar-apostolic for the newly founded
bishopric of Tessin, and that to the vacated bishopric of Basel-Soleure
the <q>learned as well as mild</q> Provost Fiala of Soleure should be
called. In this way all the cantons referred to, with the exception of
Bern, were won.<note place='foot'>Geffeken, <q>Church and State,</q> vol. ii., pp. 469-488.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_199_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Protestant Church in German Switzerland.</emph>&mdash;Among all the
German cantons, <emph>Basel</emph> (<ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>§ 172, 5</ref>), which unweariedly prosecuted the
work of home and foreign missions, fell most completely under
the influence of rationalism and then of the liberal Protestant
theology. While pietism obtained powerful support and encouragement
in its missionary institutions and movements, and there, though
developing itself on Reformed soil, assumed, in consequence of its
manifold connection with Germany, a colour almost more Lutheran
than Reformed, the university by eminent theological teachers of
scientific ability represented the Mediation school in theology of a
predominantly Reformed type. In the Canton <emph>Zürich</emph>, on the other
hand, the advanced theology, theoretical and practical, obtained an
increasing and finally an almost exclusive mastery in the university
and church. But yet, when in 1839 the Grand Council called Dr.
David Strauss to a theological professorship, the Zürich people rose
to a man against the proposal, the appointment was not enforced, the
Grand Council was overthrown, and Strauss pensioned. The victory
and ascendency of this reaction, however, was not of long continuance.
Theological and ecclesiastical radicalism again won the upper
hand and maintained it unchecked. In the other German cantons
the most diverse theological schools were represented alongside of one
another, yet with steadily increasing advantage to liberal and radical
tendencies. The theological faculty at <emph>Bern</emph> favoured mainly a
liberal mediation theology, and an attempt of the orthodox party in
1847, to set aside the appointment of Professor E. Zeller by means of
a popular tumult, miscarried. From 1860 ecclesiastical liberalism
prevailed in German Protestant Switzerland, frequently going the
length of the extremest radicalism and showing its influence even in
the cantonal and synodal legislation. The starting of the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zeitstimmen
für d. ref. Schweiz</foreign>,</q> in 1859, by Henry Lang, who had fled in
1848 from Württemberg to Switzerland, and died in 1876 as pastor
in Zürich, marked an epoch in the history of the radical liberal movement
in Swiss theology. In Fred. Langhans, since 1876 professor
at Bern, he had a zealous comrade in the fight. During 1864-1866,
Langhans published a series of violent controversial tracts against
the pietistic orthodox party in Switzerland, which zealously prosecuted
foreign missions, and in 1866 he founded the <emph>Swiss Reform
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
Union</emph>, while Alb. Bitzius, son of the writer known as Jer. Gotthelf
(<ref target='Section_174_Para_8'>§ 174, 8</ref>) started as its organ the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Reformblätter aus d. bernischen
Kirche</foreign>,</q> which was subsequently amalgamated with the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Zeitstimmem</foreign>.&mdash;After
more or less violent conflicts with pietistic orthodoxy, still
always pretty strongly represented, especially in the aristocracy, the
emancipation of the schools from the church and the introduction of
obligatory civil marriage were accomplished in most cantons, even
before the revised Federal constitution of 1874 and the marriage law
of 1875 gave to these principles legal sanction throughout the whole
of Switzerland. In almost all Protestant cantons the re-election or
new election to all spiritual offices every six years was ordained by
law, in many the freeing of the clergy from any creed subscription
with the setting aside of confessional writings as well as of the
orthodox liturgy, hymnbooks and catechisms was also carried, and
the withdrawing of the Apostles' Creed from public worship and
from the baptismal formula was enjoined. The Basel synod in 1883, by
thirty-six to twenty-seven votes, carried the motion to make baptism
no longer a condition of confirmation; and although the Zürich
synod in 1882 still held baptism obligatory for membership in the
national church, the Cantonal Council in 1883, on consulting the law
of the church, overturned this decision by 140 against 19 votes.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_199_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Protestant Church in French Switzerland.</emph>&mdash;The French philosophy
of the eighteenth century had given to the Reformed church
of <emph>Geneva</emph> a prevailingly rationalistic tendency. Notwithstanding, or
just because of this, Madame Krüdener, in 1814, with her conventicle
pietism, found an entrance there, and won in the young theologian
Empaytaz a zealous supporter and an apostle of conversion preaching.
In the next year a wealthy Englishman, Haldane, appeared there as
the apostle of methodistic piety, and inspired the young pastor
Malan with enthusiasm for the revival mission. Empaytaz and
Malan now by speech and writing charged the national church with
defection from the Christian faith, and won many zealous believers as
adherents, especially among students of theology. The <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Vénérable
Compagnie</foreign> of the Geneva clergy, hitherto resting on its lees in
rationalistic quiet, now in 1817 thought it might still the rising
storm by demanding of theological candidates at ordination the vow
not to preach on the two natures in Christ, original sin, predestination,
etc., but thereby they only poured oil on the fire. The adherents
of the daily increasing evangelical movement withdrew from
the national church, founded free independent communities and
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Réunions</foreign> under the banner of the restoration of Calvinistic orthodoxy,
and were by their enemies nicknamed <foreign rend='italic'>Momiers</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> mummery
traders or hypocrites. The government imprisoned and banished
their leaders, while the mob, unchecked, heaped upon them all manner
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
of abuse. The persecution came to an end in 1830. Thereafter settling
down in quiet moderation, it founded in 1831 the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Société évangélique</foreign>,
which, in 1832, established an <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Ecole de Théologie</foreign>, and became
the centre of the Free church evangelical movement. From that time
the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Eglise libre</foreign> of Geneva has existed unmolested alongside of the
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Eglise Nationale</foreign>, and the opposition at first so violent has been
moderated on both sides by the growth of conciliatory and mediating
tendencies. Since 1850, two divergent parties have arisen within the
bosom of the free church itself, which without any serious conflict
continued alongside of one another, until in May, 1883, the majority
of the presbytery resolved to make a peaceful separation, the stricter
forming the congregation of the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Pelisserie</foreign>, and the more liberal that of
the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Oratoire</foreign>. At the same time a committee was appointed to draw
up a confession upon which both could unite in lasting fellowship.
But when this failed, a formal and complete separation was agreed
upon at the new year.&mdash;From Geneva the Methodist revival spread to
<emph>Vaud</emph>. The religious movement got a footing, especially in Lausanne.
The Grand Council, however, did not allow the contemplated formation
of an independent congregation, and in 1824 forbad all <q>sectarian</q>
assemblies, while the mob raged even more wildly than at
Geneva against the <q><foreign rend='italic'>Momiers</foreign>.</q> The excitement increased when, in
1839, by decision of the Grand Council, the Helvetic Confession was
abrogated. When in 1845 a revolutionary radical government came
into office at Lausanne, the refusal of many clergymen to read from
the pulpit a political proclamation, caused a thorough division in the
church, for the preachers referred to were in a body driven out of the
national church. A Free church of Vaud now developed itself alongside
of the national church, sorely oppressed and persecuted by the
radical government, and spread into other Swiss cantons. It owed its
freedom from sectarian narrowness mainly to the influence of the
talented and thoroughly independent Alex. Vinet, who devoted his
whole energies and brilliant eloquence to the interests of religious
freedom and liberty of conscience and to the struggle for the separation
of church and state. Vinet was from 1817 teacher of the French
language and literature in Basel, then from 1837 to 1845 professor
of practical theology at Lausanne, but on the reconstruction of the
university he was not re-elected. He died in 1847.<note place='foot'>R. J. Sandeman, <q>Alexander Vinet</q> in <q>Evangelical Succession
Lectures,</q> Third Series, Edinburgh, 1884. Dorner, <q>History of Protestant
Theology,</q> ii., 470, 478.</note>&mdash;In the canton
<emph>Neuchatel</emph> the State Council in 1873 introduced a law, which granted
unconditional liberty of conscience, freedom in teaching and worship
without any sort of restriction on clergy, teachers and congregations.
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
The Grand Council by forty-seven votes to forty-six gave it its sanction,
notwithstanding the almost unanimous protest of the evangelical
synod, and refused to appeal to a popular vote. When an appeal to
the Federal Council proved fruitless, somewhere about one half of the
pastors, including the theological professors and all the students, left
the state church, and formed an <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Eglise libre</foreign>; while the other half
regarded it as their duty to remain in the national church so long
as they were not hindered from preaching God's word in purity and
simplicity. Both parties had a common meeting point in the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Union
évangélique</foreign>, and a law originally passed in favour of the Old Catholics,
which secured to all seceders a right to the joint use of their respective
churches, proved also of advantage to the Free church.&mdash;The
canton <emph>Geneva</emph> issued, in 1874, a Protestant law of worship, which with
dogma and liturgy also threw overboard ordination, and maintained
that the clergy are answerable only to their conscience and their
electors. Yet at the new election of the consistory in 1879, at the
close of the legal term of four years, the evangelical and moderate
party again obtained the supremacy, and a law introduced by the
radical party in the Grand Council, demanding the withdrawal of the
budget of worship and the separation of church and state, was, on
July 4th, 1880, thrown out by universal popular vote, by a majority
of 9,000 to 4,000.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_200'/>
<head>§ 200. Holland and Belgium.</head>

<p>
Among the most serious mistakes in the new partition of
states at the Vienna Congress was the combining in one
kingdom of the United Netherlands the provinces of Holland
and Belgium, diverse in race, language, character, and
religion. The contagion of French Revolution of July, 1830,
however, caused an outbreak in Brussels, which ended in
the separation of Catholic Belgium from the predominantly
Protestant Holland. Belgium has since then been the scene
of unceasing and changeful conflicts between the liberal
and ultramontane parties, whose previous combination was
now completely shattered. And while, on the other hand,
in the Reformed state church of Holland, theological studies,
leaning upon German science, have taken a liberal and even
radical destructive course, the not inconsiderable Roman
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
Catholic population has fallen, under Jesuit leading, more
and more into bigoted obscurantism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_200_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The United Netherlands.</emph>&mdash;The constitution of the new kingdom
created in 1814 guaranteed unlimited freedom to all forms of worship
and complete equality of all citizens without distinction of
religious confession. Against this the Belgian episcopate protested
with bishop Maurice von Broglie, of Ghent, at their head, who refused,
in 1817, the prayers of the church for the heretical crown princess
and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Te Deum</foreign> for the newborn heir to the throne. As he
went so far as to excite the Catholic people on all occasions against
the Protestant government, the angry king, William I., summoned
him to answer for his conduct before the court of justice. But he
eluded inquiry by flight to France, and as guilty of high treason
was sentenced to death, which did not prevent him from his exile unweariedly
fanning the flames of rebellion. The number of cloisters
grew from day to day and also the multitude of clerical schools and
seminaries, in which the Catholic youth was trained up in the principles
of the most violent fanaticism. The government in 1825 closed
the seminaries, expelled Jesuit teachers, forbad attendance at Jesuit
schools abroad, and founded a college at Louvain, in which all studying
for the church were obliged to pass through a philosophical curriculum.
The common struggle for maintaining the liberty of instruction
promised by the constitution made political radicalism and
ultramontanism confederates, and the government, intimidated by
this combination, agreed, in a concordat with the pope in 1827, to
modify the obligatory into a facultative attendance at Louvain
College. The inevitable consequence of this was the speedy and complete
decay of the college. But the confederacy of the radicals and
ultramontanes continued, directing itself against other misdeeds of
the government, and was not broken up until in 1830 it attained its
object by the disjunction of Belgium and Holland.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_200_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Kingdom of Holland.</emph>&mdash;In the prevailingly <emph>Reformed</emph> national
church rationalism and latitudinarian supernaturalism had to such
an extent blotted out the ecclesiastical distinctions between Reformed,
Remonstrants, Mennonites, and Lutherans, that the clergy of one
party would unhesitatingly preach in the churches of the others.
Then rose the poet Bilderdijk, driven from political into religious
patriotism, to denounce with glowing fury the general declension
from the orthodoxy of Dort. Two Jewish converts of his, the poet
and apologist Isaac da Costa, and the physician Cappadose, gave him
powerful support. A zealous young clergyman, Henry de Cock, was
theological mouthpiece of the party. Because he offended church
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
order, especially by ministering in other congregations, he was suspended
and finally deposed in 1834. The greater part of his congregation
and four other pastors with him formally declared their
secession from the unfaithful church, as a return to the orthodox
Reformed church. As separatists and disturbers of public worship,
they were fined and imprisoned, and were at last satisfied with the
recognition granted them of royal grace in 1839, as a separate or
<emph>Christian Reformed Church</emph>. It consists now of 364 congregations,
embracing about 140,000 souls, with a flourishing seminary at
Kampen. The <emph>Reformed State Church</emph>, with three-fourths of all the
Protestant population, persevered in and developed its liberalistic
tendencies. The State Synod of 1883 expressly declared that the
Netherland Reformed Church demands from its teachers not agreement
with all the statements of the confessional writings, but only
with their spirit, gist, and essence; and the synod of 1877, by the vote
of a majority, stated that no sort of formulated confession should be
required even of candidates for confirmation. Yet even amid such
proceedings from various sides, a churchly and evangelical reaction
of considerable importance set in. Three great parties within the
state church carried on a life and death struggle with one another:
(1) The Strict Calvinists, whose leader is Dr. Kuyper, formerly pastor
in Amsterdam; (2) The so-called Middle Party, which falls into two
divisions: the, just about expiring, Ethical Irenical Party, with the
Utrecht professor Van Oosterzee (died 1882), and the Evangelical Party
with the Gröningen professor Hofstede de Groot, since 1872 Emeritus,
as leaders, of which the former, subordinating the confession, regards
the Christian life as the main thing in Christianity, and the latter
declares itself prepared to take the gospel alone for its creed and confession;
and (3) The so-called Modern Party, which, with Professors
Scholten and Kuenen as leaders, has its centre at Leyden, and in
theology carries out with reckless energy the destructive critical
principles of the school of Baur and Wellhausen (§ 182, <ref target='Section_182_Para_7'>7</ref>, <ref target='Section_182_Para_18'>18</ref>). The
<q><emph>Moderns</emph></q> are also the founders and leaders of the <q><emph>Protestant Federation</emph></q>
after the German model (<ref target='Section_180'>§ 180</ref>), with its annual assemblies
since 1873, in opposition to which a <q><emph>Confessional Union</emph></q> holds its
annual meetings at Utrecht, and operates by means of evangelists and
lay preachers in places where there are only <q>Modern</q> pastors. The
higher and cultured classes in the congregations mostly favour the
Gröningen and some also the Leyden school, but the great majority
of the middle and lower classes are adherents of Kuyper, and have
frequently secured majorities in the Congregational Church Council.&mdash;The
Dutch school law of 1856 banished every sort of confessional
religious education from public schools supported by the state, and
so called forth the erection of numerous denominational schools
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
independent of the state, and the founding of a <q><emph>Union for Christian
Popular Education</emph>,</q> which has spread through the whole country.
The university law sanctioned, after violent debates in the chamber,
in 1876, establishes in place of the old theological faculties, professorships
for the science of religion generally, with the exception of
dogmatics and practical theology, and left it with the Reformed
State Synod to care for these two subjects, either in a theological
seminary or by founding for itself the two theological professorships
in the universities and supporting them from the sums voted for the
state church. The synod decided on the latter course, and appointed
to the new chairs men of moderate liberal views. The adherents of
the strict Calvinistic party, however, founded a Free Reformed University
at Amsterdam, which was opened in autumn, 1880. Its first
rector was Kuyper.&mdash;The <emph>Lutheran Church</emph> of fifty congregations and
sixty-two pastors, with about 60,000 souls, has also had since 1816
a theological seminary. In it neological tendencies prevail.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_200_Para_3'/>
3. The founding of the Free University at Amsterdam, referred to
above, led to a series of violent conflicts which threatened to break up
the whole Reformed church of the Netherlands by a wild schism.
The Reformed State Synod, consisting mainly of Gröningen theologians,
but also numbering many members belonging to the Modern
or Leyden school, and constituting the supreme ecclesiastical court,
had, in spite of its eleventh rule, which makes <q>the maintenance of
the doctrine</q> a main task of all church government, for a long time
admitted the principle of unfettered freedom of teaching, and ordained
that even evidence of orthodoxy on the part of candidates for confirmation
would no longer be regarded as a condition of their acceptance,
their examination referring only to their knowledge, the
examining clergy and not the assisting elders being judges in this
matter. When now the Free University had been founded in direct
opposition to the synod, the latter resolved to reject all its pupils at
the examination of candidates, and when, in the summer of 1885, its
first student presented himself, actually carried out this resolution.
Thereupon the university transferred the examination to a committee,
elected by itself, consisting of orthodox Reformed pastors and elders,
and a small village congregation agreed to elect the candidate for its
poorly endowed, and so for seventeen years vacant, pastorate. But
the synod refused him ordination. Therefore the director of a strict
Calvinistic Gymnasium, formerly a pastor, performed the ceremony,
and the congregation announced its secession from the synodal union.
At the same time in Amsterdam a second conflict arose over the
question of candidates for confirmation. Three pastors of the
<q>modern</q> school demanded the elders subject to them, among them
Dr. Kuyper, to take part as required in the examining of their
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
candidates; but these refused to give their assistance, because the
previous training had not been according to Scripture and the confession,
and also the majority of the church council approved of
this refusal, as the parents had complained, and declared that the
certificate of morality demanded by other pastors could be made
out only if candidates for confirmation had previously formally and
solemnly confessed their genuine and hearty faith in Jesus Christ
as the only and all-sufficient Saviour, which these, however, in
accordance with the Dutch practice of the eighteenth century,
declined to do. The controversy was carried by appeal through all
the church courts, and finally the State Synod ordered the church
council to make delivery of the certificates within six weeks on pain
of suspension. But this was brought about before the expiry of
that period by the outbreak of a far more serious conflict over matters
of administration. In Amsterdam the administration of church
property lay with a special commission, responsible to the church
council, consisting of members, one half from the church council and
the other half from the congregations. If in the beginning of January,
1886, the threatened suspension and deposition of the church council
should be carried out, in accordance with proper order until the
appointment of a new council all the rights of the same, therefore
also that of supervising that commission, would fall to the <q>classical board</q>
(§ 143, 1) as the next highest court. In order to avoid this,
the fateful resolution was passed on December 14th, 1885, to alter § 41
of the regulations, so that, if the church council in the discharge of
its duty to govern the community in accordance with God's word and
the legalized church confession, it would be so hindered therein that
it might feel in conscience obliged to obey God rather than man and
accept suspension and deposition, and a church council should be
appointed, the administrative commission would be obliged to remain
subject, not to this, but to the original commission. The <q>classical
board</q> annulled this resolution, suspended on January 4th, 1886, for
continued obstinacy the previous church council, and constituted
itself, pending decision on the part of discipline, interim administrator
of all its rights and duties. The suspended majority, however,
called a meeting for the same day, and when it found the doors of its
meeting place closed, sent for a locksmith to break them open. They
were prevented by the police, who then, by putting on a safety lock,
strengthening the boards of the door by mailed plates, and setting a
watch, greatly reduced the chances of an entrance. But the opposition
sent to the watchers a letter by a policeman demanding that the
representatives of the church council should be allowed to pass; upon
which these, regarding it as an order of the police, withdrew. They
then had the mailed plates sawn, took possession of the hall
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
and the archives and treasure box lying there, and refused admission
to the classical board. While then the question of law and possession
was referred to the courts of law, and there the final decision would
not be given before the lapse of a year, the disciplinary procedure
took its course through all the ecclesiastical courts and ended in the
deposition of all resisting elders and pastors. The latter preached
now to great crowds in hired halls. From the capital the excitement
increased by means of violent publications on both sides, spread over
the whole land and produced discord in many other communities.
Wild and uproarious tumults first broke out in Leidendorf, a suburb
of Leyden. The pastor and the majority of the church council refused
to enter on their congregational list two girls who had been confirmed
by liberal churchmen elsewhere, and with by far the greater part of
the congregation seceded from the synodal union. The classical
board now, in July, 1886, declared the pastorate vacant, and ordered
that a regular interim service should be conducted on Sundays by
the pastors of the circuit. The uproar among the people, however,
was thereby only greatly increased, so that the civil authorities were
obliged to protect the deputed preachers, by a large military escort,
from rude maltreatment, and to secure quiet during public worship
by a company of police in church. And similar conflicts soon broke
out on like occasions and with similar consequences in many other
places throughout all parts of the land. In December, 1886, the
Amsterdam church council also declared its secession from the state
church, and a numerously attended <q>Reformed Church Congress</q> at
Amsterdam, in January, 1887, summoned by Kuyper in the interests
of the crowd of seceders, resolved to accept the decision of the law in
regard to church property.<note place='foot'>Cairns, <q>The Present Struggle in the National Church of Holland,</q>
in <emph>Presbyterian Review</emph> for January, 1888, pp. 87-108. Wicksteed,
<q>The Ecclesiastical Institutions of Holland.</q> London.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_200_Para_4'/>
4. Even after the separation of Belgium there was still left a considerable
number of <emph>Catholics</emph>, about three-eighths of the population,
most numerous in Brabant, Limburg, and Luxemburg, and these were,
as of old, inclined to the most bigoted ultramontanism. This tendency
was greatly enhanced when the new constitutional law of 1848
announced the principle of absolute liberty of belief, in consequence
of which the Jesuits crowded in vast numbers, and the pope in 1853
organized a new Catholic hierarchy in the land, with four bishops
and an archbishop at Utrecht, under the control of the propaganda.
The Protestant population went into great excitement over this.
The liberal ministry of Thorbecke was obliged to resign, but the
chambers at length sanctioned the papal ordinance, only securing
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
the Protestant population against its misapplication and abuse.&mdash;On
the withdrawal of the French in 1814 there were only eight cloisters
remaining; but in 1861 there were thirty-nine for monks and 137
for nuns, and since then the number has considerably increased.&mdash;The
Dutch <emph>Old Catholics</emph> (<ref target='Section_165_Para_8'>§ 165, 8</ref>), on account of their protest against
the dogma of the Immaculate Conception (<ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>§ 185, 2</ref>), enjoined upon
the Catholic church by the pope, were anew excommunicated, and
joined the German Old Catholics in rejecting the decrees of the
Vatican Council (<ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>§ 190, 1</ref>).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_200_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Kingdom of Belgium.</emph>&mdash;Catholic Belgium obtained after its
separation from Holland a constitution by which unlimited freedom
of religious worship and education, and the right of confessing
opinion and of associating, were guaranteed, and to the state was
allowed no interference with the affairs of the church beyond the
duty of paying the clergy. Also in Leopold I., 1830-1865, of the
house of Saxe-Coburg, it had a king who though himself a Protestant
was faithful to the constitution, and, according to agreement, had
his children trained up in the Roman Catholic church. The confederacy
of radicalism and ultramontanism, however, was broken by
the irreconciliable enmity and violent conflict in daily life and in
the chambers among clerical and liberal ministers. The ultramontanes
founded at Louvain in 1834 a strictly Catholic university,
which was under the oversight of the bishops and the patronage of
the Virgin; while the liberals promoted the erection of an opposition
university for free science at Brussels. That the Jesuits used to the
utmost for their own ends the liberty granted them by the constitution
by means of missions and the confessional, schools, cloisters, and
brotherhoods of every kind is what might have been expected. But
liberalism also knew how to conduct a propaganda and to bring the
clergy into discredit with the educated classes by unveiling their
intrigues, legacy-hunting, etc., while these exercised a great influence
chiefly upon bigoted females. The number of cloisters, which on
the separation from Holland amounted only to 280, had risen in 1880
in that small territory to 1,559, with 24,672 inmates, of whom 20,645
were nuns.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_200_Para_6'/>
6. After the ultramontane party had enjoyed eight years of almost
unchallenged supremacy, the Malou ministry favourable to it was
overthrown in June, 1878, and a liberal government, under the
presidency of Frère-Orban, took its place. Then began the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign>
in Belgium. The charge of public education was taken from
the ministry of the interior, and a special minister appointed in the
person of Van Humbeeck. He began by changing all girls' schools
under the management of sisters of spiritual orders into communal
schools, and in January, 1879, brought in a bill for reorganizing
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
elementary education, which completely secularized the schools;
deprived the clergy of all official influence over them, and relegated
religious instruction to the care of the family and the church, the
latter, however, having the necessary accommodation allowed in the
school buildings. The chambers approved the bill, and the king
confirmed it, in spite of all protests and agitation by the clergy. The
clerical journals put a black border on their issue which published
it; the provincial councils under clerical influence nullified as far as
possible all money bequests for the public schools, and the bishops
assembled in August at Mechlin resolved to found free schools in
all communities, and to refuse absolution to all parents who entrusted
their children to state schools and all teachers in them, in order
thus to cause a complete decay of the public schools, which indeed
happened to this extent that within a few months 1,167 communal
schools had not a single Catholic scholar. On complaint being made
by the government to Leo XIII., he expressed through the Brussels
nuncio his regret and disapproval of the proceedings of the bishops;
but, on the other hand, he not only privately praised them on account
of their former zeal in opposing the school law, but also incited them
to continued opposition. When this double dealing of the curia was
discovered, the government in June, 1880, broke off all diplomatic
relations with the Vatican by recalling their ambassador and giving
the nuncio his passports. The ministerial president publicly in the
chamber of deputies characterized the action of the Holy See as <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>fourberie</foreign>.</q>
Whereupon the pope at the next consistory called princes
and peoples as witnesses of this insult. In May, 1882, the results of
the inquiry into clerical incitements against the public was read in
the chamber, where such startling revelations were made as these:
Priests taught the children that they should no longer pray for the
king when he had committed the mortal sin of confirming the school
law; the ministers are worse than murderers and true Herods; a
priest even taught children to pray that God might cause their
<q>liberal</q> parents to die, etc. Amid such conflicts the Catholic party
in parliament split into the parties of the <foreign rend='italic'>Politici</foreign>, who were willing
to submit to the constitution, and that of the <foreign rend='italic'>Intransigenti</foreign>, who,
under the direction of the bishops and the university of Louvain,
held high above everything the standard of the syllabus. The latter
fought with such passionateness, that the pope felt obliged in 1881
to enjoin upon the episcopate <q>that prudent attitude</q> which the
church in such cases always maintains in <q>enduring many evils</q>
which for the time cannot be overcome. But undeterred, the government
continued to restrict the claims of the clergy, so far as these
were not expressly guaranteed by the constitution.&mdash;In June, 1884,
as the result of the elections for the chamber of deputies, the clerical
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
party again were in power. Malou was once more at the head of a
ministry in favour of the clericals, caused the king to dissolve the
senate, and in the new elections won there also a majority for his
party. No sooner were they in power than the clerical ministry,
in conjunction with the majority in the chambers, proceeded with
inconsiderate haste, amid the most violent, almost daily repeated
explosions from the now intensely embittered liberal and radical
section of the population, which only seemed to increase their zeal,
to employ their absolute power to the utmost in the interest of
clericalism. The restoration of diplomatic relations with the papal
curia in the spirit of absolute acquiescence in its schemes was the
grand aim of the reaction, as well as a new school law by which
the schools were completely given over again to the clergy and the
orders. But when at the next communal elections a liberal majority
was returned, and protests of the new communal councils poured
in against the school law on behalf of the vast number of state
certificated teachers reduced by it to hunger and destitution, the
Malou ministry found itself obliged to resign in October, 1884. Its
place was taken by the moderate ultramontane Beernaert ministry,
which sought indeed to quiet the excitement by mild measures, but
held firmly in all essential points to the principles of its predecessor.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_200_Para_7'/>
7. An exciting episode in the Belgium <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign> is presented
by the appearance of Bishop <emph>Dumont of Tournay</emph>, who, previously an
enthusiastic admirer of Pius IX. and a vigorous defender of the
infallibility dogma, also a zealous patron of stigmatization miracles
at Bois d'Haine (<ref target='Section_188_Para_4'>§ 188, 4</ref>), now suddenly turned round on the school
question and refused to obey the papal injunction. For this he was
first suspended, and then in 1880 formally deposed by the pope. He
afterwards wrote letters in the most advanced liberal journals with
violent denunciations of the pope, whom he would not recognise as
pope, but only as Bishop of Rome, and so styled him not Leo, but only
Pecci. In these letters Dumont makes the interesting communication
that the virgin Louise Lateau, favoured of God, has threatened with
excommunication the <q>intruder</q> Durousseaux, nominated by the
pope as his successor, because she continues to reverence Dumont as
the only legitimate Bishop of Tournay. The Vatican pronounced him
insane, and the chapter appealed to the civil authorities to have him
declared incapable in the sight of the law, which, however, they refused,
because they could not regard Dumont's insanity as proved. On the
other hand, Dumont refused to renounce his episcopal office, and accused
Durousseaux of having by night, with the help of a locksmith,
obtained entrance to his episcopal palace, and having taken forcible
possession of a casket lying there, which, besides the diocesan property
to the value of five millions, contained also about one and a
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
half millions of his own private means. Pending the issue of the
conflict, as to which of the two should be regarded as the true bishop,
the palace was now officially sealed up. The attempt to arrest the
robbed casket had to be abandoned, because meanwhile the canon
Bernard, as keeper of the treasures of the diocese, had fled with its
contents to America. He was, however, on legal warrant imprisoned
in Havanna and brought back to Belgium in 1882. In April, 1884,
the dispute of the bishops was definitively closed by the judgment
of the supreme tribunal, according to which Dumont, having been
legitimately deposed, has no more claim to the title and revenues
of his earlier office; and in 1886 the supreme court of appeal at
Brussels condemned Bernard <q>on account of serious breach of trust</q>
to three years' imprisonment.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_200_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>The Protestant Church</emph> was represented in Belgium only by small
congregations in the chief cities and some Reformed Walloon village
congregations. But for several decades, by the zealous exertions of
the Evangelical Society at Brussels with thirty-four pastors and
evangelists, the work of evangelization not only among Catholic
Walloons, but also among the Flemish population, has made considerable
progress, notwithstanding all agitation and incitement of
the people by the Catholic clergy, so that several new evangelical
congregations, consisting mostly of converts, have been formed. In
two small places indeed the whole communities, roused by episcopal
arbitrariness, have gone over.&mdash;The pastor Byse employed by the
Evangelical Society at Brussels has taken up the idea that all men
by the fall have lost their immortality, and that it could be restored
again by faith in Christ, while all the unreconciled are given over
to annihilation, the second death of Revelation ii. 11, xx. 15. So long
as he maintained this theory merely as a private opinion the society
took no offence at it, but when he began to proclaim it in his
preaching and in his instruction of the young, and declined to yield
to all advice on the matter, the synod of 1882 resolved upon his dismissal.
But a great part of his congregation still remain faithful
to him.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 201. The Scandinavian Countries.</head>

<p>
Notwithstanding the common Scandinavian-national and
Lutheran-ecclesiastical basis on which the civil and religious
life is developed, it assumed in the three Scandinavian
countries a completely diversified course. While in Denmark
the civil life bore manifold traces of democratic
tendencies and thereby the relations between church and
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
state were loosened, Sweden, with a tenacity almost unparalleled
in Protestant countries, has for a long period held
fast in exclusive attachment to the idea of a state church.
On the other hand Denmark was far more open to influences
from without hostile to the church, on the one side those
of rationalism, on the other, those of the anti-ecclesiastical
sects, especially of the Baptists and Mormons, than Sweden,
which in its certainly barren, if not altogether dead orthodoxy
till after the middle of the century was almost hermetically
sealed against all heterogeneous influences, but
yet could not altogether over-master the pietistically or
methodistically coloured movements of religious yearning
that arose among her own people. Norway, again, although
politically united with Sweden, has, both in national character
and in religious development, shown its more intimate
relationship with Denmark.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_201_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Denmark.</emph>&mdash;From the close of last century rationalism has had a
home in Denmark. In 1825 Professor Clausen, a moderate adherent
of the neological school, published a learned work on the opposition
of <q>Catholicism and Protestantism,</q> identifying the latter with
rationalism. First of all in that same year Pastor <emph>Grundtvig</emph> (died
1872), <q>a man of poetic genius, and skilled in the ancient history of
the land,</q> inspired with equal enthusiasm for the old Lutheranism
of his fathers and for patriotic Danism, entered the lists and replied
with powerful eloquence, lamenting the decay of Christianity and the
church. He was condemned by the court of justice as injurious,
after he had during the process resigned his pastoral office. A like
fate befell the orientalist Lindberg, who charged Clausen with the
breach of his ordination vow. The adherents of Grundtvig met for
mutual edification in conventicles, until at last in 1832 he obtained
permission again to hold public services. Not less influential was the
work of Sören <emph>Kierkegaard</emph> (died 1855), who, largely in sympathy with
Grundtvig, without ecclesiastical office, in his writings earnestly pled
for a living subjective piety and unweariedly maintained an uncompromising
struggle against the official Christianity of the secularized
clergy. The wild, unmeasured Danomania of 1848-1849, during the
military conflict with Germany, drew opponents together and made
them friends. Grundtvig declaimed against everything German,
and of the two factors, which he had formerly regarded as the pivots
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
on which universal history turned, Danism and Lutheranism, he now
let go Lutheranism as of German origin. He therefore proposed the
abrogation of the distinctive German-Lutheran confessions, placed
the Apostles' Creed before and above the Bible and, pressing in a one-sided
manner the doctrine of baptismal grace, demanded a <q>joyous
Christianity,</q> denied the necessity of continued preaching and exercise
of repentance, and wished especially to introduce into the schools
the Norse mythology as introductory to the study of Christianity.
His adherents wrought with the anti-church party for the abolition
of the union of church and state. The Danish constitutional law
of 1849 abolished the confessional churches of the state church, and
Catholics, Reformed, Moravians, and Jews were granted equal civil
rights with the Lutherans. Since then the Catholic church has made
slow but steady progress in the country, and the increasing Baptist
movement was also favoured by a law of the Volkthing of 1857,
which abolished compulsory baptism, and only required the enrolment
of all children in the church books of their respective districts
within the period of one year. Civil marriage had also been granted
to dissenters in 1851, and in 1868 the peculiar institution of <q>electing
communities</q> was founded, by means of which twenty families
from one or more parishes which declare themselves dissatisfied with
the pastors appointed them, may, without leaving the national
church, form an independent congregation under pastors chosen by
themselves and maintained at their own cost. The <emph>Schleswig-Holstein</emph>
revolution in 1848, occasioned enormous confusion and disturbance in
the ecclesiastical conditions of the district. Over a hundred German
pastors were expelled and forty-six Schleswig parishes deprived
of the use of the German language in church and school. In 1864
both provinces were at last by the Austrian and Prussian alliance
rent from the Danish government, and in consequence of the German
war of 1866 were incorporated with Prussia.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_201_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Sweden.</emph>&mdash;In Sweden there was formed in 1803, in opposition to
the barren orthodoxy of the state church, a religious association
which, if not altogether free of pietistic narrowness, was yet without
any heretical doctrinal tendency, and exercised a quiet and wholesome
influence. From the diligent <emph>reading</emph> of Scripture and the
works of Luther that prevailed among its members it obtained the
name of <foreign lang='sv' rend='italic'>Läsare</foreign>. The state proceeded against its members with fines
and imprisonment, according to the old conventicle law of 1726, and
the mob treated them with insults and violence. But in 1842 a fanatical
tendency began to show itself under the leadership of a peasant,
Erich Jansen, who induced many <q><emph>Readers</emph></q> to quit the church and
to cast into the fire even Luther's Postils and Catechism as quite
superfluous alongside of Holy Scripture. They mostly emigrated to
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
America in 1846. The law of the land since 1686 threatened every
Swede who seceded from the Lutheran state church with imprisonment
and exile, loss of civil privileges and the right of inheritance.
As might therefore be supposed the French Marshal Bernadotte,
who in 1818, under the name of Charles XIV., ascended the throne
of Sweden, had been previously in 1810 obliged to repudiate the
Catholic confession. Even in 1857 the Reichstag rejected a royal
proposal to set aside the Secession as well as the Conventicle Act.
But in the very next year, the holding of conventicles under clerical
supervision, and in 1860, the secession to other ecclesiastical denominations,
were allowed by law. The constitution of 1865 still indeed
made adherence to the Lutheran confession a condition of qualification
for a seat in either of the chambers. The Reichstag of 1870
at last sanctioned the admission of all Christian dissenters and also
of Jews to all offices of state as well as to the membership of the
Reichstag. On behalf of dissenters, especially of the numerous
Baptists and Methodists, the right of civil marriage was granted in
1879. In 1877, Waldenström, head-master of the Latin school at
Gefle, without ecclesiastical ordination, began zealously and successfully
by speech and writings (to secure the widest possible circulation
of which a joint stock company with large capital was formed) to
work for the revival of the Christian life in the Lutheran national
church. He vigorously contended against the church doctrine of
atonement and justification, repudiating the idea of vicarious penal
suffering, and broke through all church order by allowing the sacrament
of the Lord's supper to be dispensed by laymen. He thus
put himself, with his numerous following, directed by lay preachers
in their own prayer meetings and mission halls, into direct opposition
to the church, but by the wise forbearance of the ecclesiastical
authorities he has not yet been formally ejected.<note place='foot'>Lumsden, <q>Sweden, its Religious State and Prospects.</q> London,
1855.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_201_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Norway.</emph>&mdash;In Norway, toward the end of last century, rationalism
was dominant in almost all the pulpits, and only a few remnants of
Moravian revivalism raised a voice against it. But in 1796, a simple
unlearned peasant <emph>Hans Nielsen Hauge</emph>, then in his twenty-fifth year
made his appearance as a revival preacher, creating a mighty spiritual
movement that spread among the masses throughout the whole land.
He had obtained his own religious knowledge from the study of old
Lutheran practical theology, and arising at a period of extraordinary
spiritual excitement, <q>his call,</q> as Hase says, <q>to be a prophet was
like that of the herdsman of Tekoa.</q> From 1799 he continued itinerating
for five years, persecuted, reproached, and calumniated by the
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
rationalistic clergy, ten times cast into prison, under a law of 1741,
which forbad laymen to preach, and then set free, until he had gone
over all Norway even to its farthest and remotest corners, preaching
unweariedly everywhere in houses and in the open air often three
or four times a day, and nourishing besides the flame which he had
kindled by voluminous writings and an extensive correspondence.
He directed his preaching not only against the rationalism of the
state clergy, but also against the antinomian religion of feeling, of
<q>Blood and Wounds</q> theology introduced in earlier days by the
Moravians, with a one-sided emphasis and exaggeration indeed, but
still in all essentials maintaining the basis and keeping within the
lines of Lutheran orthodoxy. In 1804 he was charged with tendencies
dangerous to church and state, obtaining money from peasants on
false pretences, inciting the people against the clergy, etc., and again
cast into prison. The trial this time was carried on for ten years,
until at last in 1814 the supreme court sentenced him on account of
his invectives against the clergy to pay a fine, but pronounced him
not guilty on the other charges. Broken down in spirit and body by
his long imprisonment, he could not think of engaging again in his
former work. He died in 1824. Numerous peasant preachers, however,
issuing from his school were ready to go forth in his footsteps,
and till this day the salutary effects of his and their activity are
seen in wide circles. The law of 1741 which had been made to tell
against them was at last abrogated by the Storthing in 1842. In
1845 the right of forming Christian sects was recognised, and in
1851 even the Jews were allowed the right of settlement previously
refused them, and the security of all civil privileges. Since that time
even in Norway the Catholic church has made considerable progress;
in June, 1878, it had eleven churches and fourteen priests.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_202'/>
<head>§ 202. Great Britain and Ireland.</head>

<p>
During the course of the century a breach from without
was made upon the stronghold of the Anglican established
church and its legal standing throughout the United Kingdom.
The strong coherence of the Anglican episcopal
church had already been weakened internally by the rise
within its own bosom of High, Low, and Broad tendencies.
The advance of the first-named party to tractarianism and
ritualism opened the door to Romish sympathies, while in
the last-named school German rationalism and criticism
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
found favour, and the low church party was not ashamed
to go hand-in-hand with the evangelical pietistic and
methodistic tendencies of the dissenters. There followed
numerous conversions to Rome, especially from the aristocratic
ranks of the upper ten thousand. The Emancipation
Act of 1829 opened the door to both Houses of Parliament
to the Catholics, and in 1858 the same privileges were extended
to the Jews. Also the bulwarks which the state
church had in the old universities of Oxford and Cambridge
were undermined, and in 1871 were completely overthrown
by the legal abolition of all confessional tests. Down to
1869 the hierarchy of the episcopal state church, though
clearly alien to the country, maintained its legal position in
Catholic Ireland, till at last the Irish Church Bill brought
it there to an end. Repeatedly have bills been introduced
in the House of Commons, though hitherto without success,
by members of the incessantly agitating Liberation Society,
to disestablish the churches of England, Scotland, and
Wales.<note place='foot'>Stoughton, <q>Religion in England during the First Half of the
Present Century, with a Postscript on Subsequent Events.</q> 2 vols.,
London 1876. Molesworth, <q>History of England from 1830 to 1874.</q>
3 vols., London.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Episcopal State Church.</emph>&mdash;The two opposing parties of the
state church corresponded to the two political parties of Tories and
Whigs. The <emph>high church party</emph>, which has its most powerful representatives
in the aristocracy, holds aloof from the dissenters, seeks to
maintain the closest connexion between church and state, and eagerly
contends for the retention of all old ecclesiastical forms and ordinances
in constitution, worship, and doctrine. On the other hand the <emph>evangelical
or low church party</emph>, which is more or less methodistically
inclined, holds free intercourse with dissenters, associating with them
in home and foreign mission work, etc., and with various shades of
differences advocates the claims of progress against those of immobility,
the independence of the church against its identification with
the state, the evangelical freedom and general priesthood of believers
against orthodoxy and hierarchism. From their midst arose a movement
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
in 1871, occasioned by the Oxford <q>Essays and Reviews</q> and
the works of Bishop Colenso, which resulted in the publication, under
the authority of the bishops, of the <q>Speaker's Commentary,</q> so-called
because suggested by Denison, who had long been speaker of the
House of Commons. It is a learned, thoroughly conservative commentary
on the whole Bible by the ablest theologians of England.
On the revision of the English translation of the Bible see <ref target='Section_181_Para_4'>§ 181, 4</ref>.
Besides these two parties, however, there has arisen a third, the broad
church party. It originated with the distinguished poet and philosopher,
Coleridge (died 1834), and includes many of the most excellent
and scholarly of the clergy, especially those most eminent for their
acquaintance with German theology and philosophy. They do not
form an organized ecclesiastical party like the evangelicals and high
church men, but endeavour not only to overcome the narrowness and
severity of the former, but also to secure a broader basis and a wider
horizon for theology as well as for the church.<note place='foot'>Littledale, <q>Church Parties,</q> art. in the <emph>Contemporary Review</emph> for
July, 1874, pp. 287-320. Mozley, <q>Reminiscences of Oriel College.</q>
London, 1882.</note>&mdash;The struggle for
the legalizing of marriage with a deceased wife's sister has been energetically
pressed since 1850, but though the House of Commons has
repeatedly passed the bill, it has been hitherto by small majorities,
under the influence of the bishops, rejected by the House of Lords.&mdash;A
non-official <emph>Pan-Anglican Council</emph> of English bishops from all parts
of the world, excluding the laity and inferior clergy, with pre-eminently
anti-Romish and anti-ritualistic tendencies, was held in
London in 1867 (cf. <ref target='Section_175_Para_5'>§ 175, 5</ref>). When it met the second time in 1878,
it was attended by nearly one hundred bishops, one of them a negro.
Of the three weeks' debates and their results, however, no detailed
account has been published.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Tractarians and Ritualists.</emph>&mdash;The activity of the dissenters
and the episcopal evangelical party's attachment to them stirred up
the adherents of the high church party to vigorous guarding of their
interests, and drove them into a one-sided exaggerated accentuation of
the Catholic element. The centre of this movement since 1833 was
the university of Oxford. Its leaders were Professors Pusey and
Newman, its literary organ the <emph>Tracts for the Times</emph>, from which the
party received the name of <emph>Tractarians</emph>. This was a series of ninety
treatises, published 1833-1841, on the basis of Anglo-Catholicism, which
sought, while holding by the Thirty-nine Articles, to affirm with
equal decidedness the genuine Protestantism over against the Roman
papacy, and, in the importance which it attached to the apostolical
succession of the episcopate and priesthood and the apostolical tradition
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
for the interpretation of Scripture, the genuine Catholicism over
against every form of ultra-Protestantism. In this way, too, their
dogmatics in all the several doctrines, as far as the Thirty-nine
Articles would by any means allow, was approximated to the Roman
Catholic doctrine, and indeed by-and-by passed over entirely to
that type of doctrine. Newman's Tract 90 caused most offence, in
which, with thoroughly jesuitical sophistry, it was argued that the
Thirty-nine Articles were capable of an explanation on the basis of
which they might be subscribed even by one who occupied in regard
to the church doctrine and practice an essentially Roman Catholic
standpoint. The university authorities now felt obliged to declare
publicly that the tracts were by no means sanctioned by them, and
that especially the application of the principles of Tract 90 to the
conduct of students in the matter of subscription of the Thirty-nine
Articles is not allowable. Bishop Bagot of Oxford, hitherto favourable
to the tractarians, refused to permit the continued issue of the tracts.
The other bishops also for the most part spoke against them in their
pastorals, and a flood of controversial pamphlets roused the wrath of
the non-Catholic populace. But on the other hand tractarianism
still found favour among the higher clergy and the aristocracy. In
1845 Newman went over to the Catholic church, and has since led a
retired life devoted to theological study. Pius IX. paid him no attention,
but in 1879 Leo XIII. acknowledged and rewarded his services
to the Catholic church by elevating him to the rank of cardinal. The
majority of the tractarians disapproved of Newman's step and remained
in the Anglican church. Thus acted Pusey (died 1882), the
recognised leader of the party, after whom they were now called
<emph>Puseyites</emph>. Many, however, followed Newman's example, so that by
the end of 1846 no less than one hundred and fifty clergymen and
prominent laymen were received into the widely opened door of the
Catholic church.<note place='foot'>Newman, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Apologia pro Vita Sua</foreign>.</q> London, 1864. Weaver
<q>Puseyism, a Refutation and Exposure,</q> London, 1843.</note>&mdash;The following twelve years, 1846-1858, were occupied
by two dogmatico-ecclesiastical conflicts vitally affecting the
interests of the tractarians. (1) <emph>The Gorham Case.</emph> The Thirty-nine
Articles took essentially Lutheran ground in treating of baptism,
recognising it as a vehicle of regeneration and divine sonship, and
the tractarians laid uncommonly great stress upon this article. So
also the Bishop of Exeter, Dr. Philpotts, refused to institute the Rev.
Cornelius Gorham because of his views on this subject. Gorham
accused him before the Archbishop of Canterbury, but the Court of
Arches decided in favour of the bishop. The Court of Appeal, however,
the judicial committee of the Privy Council, annulled the
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
episcopal judgment, and ordered that Gorham should be installed in
his office. In vain did Philpotts, by a protest before the Court of
Queen's Bench, and then before the Court of Common Pleas, against
the jurisdiction of the Privy Council in this case, in vain, too, did
Blomfield, Bishop of London, insist upon the revival of Convocation,
which for one and a half centuries had been inoperative as a spiritual
parliament with upper and lower houses, and in vain did a tractarian
assembly of more than 1,500 distinguished clergymen and laymen
lodge a solemn protest. The judgment of the Privy Council stood, and
Gorham was inducted to his office in 1850. Many of the protesters
now went over to the Catholic church, and about 600 others, like the
Puritan Pilgrim Fathers 230 years before (§ 143, 4), under ecclesiastical
oppression, emigrated to New Zealand.&mdash;(2) <emph>The Denison Eucharist
Case.</emph>&mdash;The Puseyite Archdeacon Denison of Taunton, in the diocese
of Bath and Wells, had in 1851 in open defiance of the Thirty-nine
Articles, which represent Calvin's views of the Lord's Supper, affirmed
in preaching and writing that unbelievers as well as believers eat and
drink the body and blood of the Lord. Over this he was involved
in a sharp discussion with a neighbouring clergyman called Ditcher.
In 1854 Ditcher accused Denison before his bishop, who, after vain
efforts to reconcile the parties, referred the matter to the Court of
Arches, which sought, but in vain, to end the strife by compromise.
Ditcher now in 1856 brought his complaint before the <emph>Queen's Bench</emph>,
which obliged the archbishop to take up the matter again. A commission
appointed by him declared that the complaint was quite
justifiable, and threatened Denison, when he refused any sort of retraction,
with deposition. But the Court of Appeal in 1858 stayed
the judgment on the ground of a technical error in procedure, and
Denison remained in office.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_3'/>
3. From the middle of 1850 the tractarians, who had hitherto confined
themselves to the development of the Romanizing system of
doctrine, began to apply its consequences to the church ritual and
the Christian life, and so won for themselves the name of <emph>Ritualists</emph>,
which has driven out their earlier designation. Wherever possible
they showed their Catholic zeal by introducing images, crucifixes,
candles, holy water, mass dresses, mass bells, and boy choristers,
urged the restoration of the seven sacraments, especially of extreme
unction, auricular confession, the sacrificial theory and Corpus
Christi day, of prayers for the dead and masses for souls, invocation
of saints and the blessed Virgin; they also praised celibacy and
monasticism, etc. Ritualism has from the first shown singular skill
in party organization. The <emph>English Church Union</emph>, founded in 1860,
has now nearly 200,000 members, of these about 3,000 clergymen and
50 bishops, and it embraces 300 branches over the whole domain of
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
the Anglican church. Numerous brotherhoods and sisterhoods, guilds
and orders, organized after the style of Roman Catholic monasticism,
promote the interests of ritualism, and zealously prosecute home and
foreign mission work. The <emph>Confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament</emph>
originated in 1862, was able in 1882 to celebrate Corpus Christi day
in 250 churches along with the Romish church, dispensing only with
the procession. The <emph>Society of the Holy Cross</emph>, founded in 1873 consists
only of priests, and forms a kind of directory for all branches of
the ritualistic propaganda. The <emph>English Order of St. Augustine</emph> has
a threefold division, into spiritual brothers who are preparing for
priests' orders, lay brothers who are being qualified as lay preachers,
both under the strictest vows, and a sort of tertiaries, who are free
from vows. Among the sisterhoods which already supply nurses to
all the great hospitals of the capital, the most important is that
called <q>by the name of Jesus.</q> They take, like the Beguines of the
middle ages, the three vows, but not as binding for life. By the
ultra high church party the genuine apostolic succession of the ordination
of the first Protestant archbishop, Matthew Parker, and so
the genuineness of all subsequent ordinations going back to him,
were doubted; three Anglican bishops are said to have had episcopal
consecration anew conferred on them by a Greek Catholic bishop.
The reckless and wilful procedure of the ritualists in imitating the
Roman Catholic ritual in public worship called forth frequent violent
disturbances at their services, and noisy crowds flocked to their
churches. Most frequent and violent were the riots in 1859 and 1860
in the parish of St. George's, London, where scarcely any service was
held without disgraceful scenes of hissing, whistling, stamping, and
cries of <q>No popery.</q> The offscouring of all London flocked to the Sunday
services as to a public entertainment. Instead of hymns, street
songs were sung, instead of responses blasphemous cries were shouted
forth, while cushions and prayer-books were hurled at the altar decorations,
etc. These unseemly proceedings were caused by the ritualistic
rector, Bryan King, who had introduced the objectionable ceremonial,
and obstinately continued it in spite of the decided opposition and
protests of his colleague, Mr. Allen. King's removal in 1860 first put
an end to these disturbances, which police interference proved utterly
unable to check. The ritualistic <emph>Church Union</emph>, called into existence
by these proceedings, was opposed by an anti-ritualistic <emph>Church Association</emph>,
and from both multitudes of complaints and appeals were
brought before the ecclesiastical and civil tribunals. The first case
they brought up was that of Rev. A. H. MacConochie, of Holborn,
who, having been admonished by the ecclesiastical courts on account
of his ritualistic practices in 1867, appealed to the Privy Council.
And although this court decided in 1869 that all ceremonies not
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
authorized by the prayer-book are to be regarded as forbidden, he
and his followers continued to act on the principle that whatever is
not there expressly prohibited ought to be permitted. The <emph>Public
Worship Regulation Bill</emph>, introduced by Archbishop Tait, and passed
by Parliament, which legislatively determined the procedure in ritualistic
cases, did not prevent the constant advance of this movement.
The <emph>Court of Arches</emph> now issued a suspension against the accused, and
condemned them to prison when they continued to officiate, until
they declared themselves ready to obey or to demit their office.
Tooth of Hatcham, Dale of London, Enraght of Bordesdale, and Green
of Miles Platting were actually sent to prison in 1880. But the first
three were soon liberated by the Court of Appeal finding some technical
flaw in the proceedings against them, while Green, in whose case no
such flaw appeared, lay in confinement for twenty months. The
ritualists still persistently continued their practice, and their opponents
renewed their prosecutions; these were followed by appeals
to the higher courts, presenting of petitions to both the Houses of
Parliament, addresses with vast numbers of signatures for and
against to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to Convocation which had
meanwhile been restored, to the Cabinet, to the Queen, etc. The
result was that many cases were abandoned, some obnoxious parties
transferred elsewhere, and a very few deposed.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Liberalism in the Episcopal Church.</emph>&mdash;The more liberal tendency of
the broad church party had also many supporters who scrupled not
to pass beyond the traditional bounds of English orthodoxy. In
opposition to the orthodoxy zealousy inculcated at Oxford, rationalism
found favour at the rival university of Cambridge, and vigorous
support was given to the views of the Tübingen school of Baur in
the London <emph>Westminster Review</emph>. And even in high church Oxford,
there were not wanting teachers in sympathy with the critical and
speculative rationalism of Germany. Great excitement was caused in
1860 by the <q><emph>Essays and Reviews</emph>,</q> which in seven treatises by so many
Oxford professors contested the traditional apologetics and hermeneutics
of English theology, and set a sublimated rationalism in its
place. In Germany these not very important treatises would probably
have excited little remark, but in the English church they roused
an unparalleled disturbance; more than nine thousand clergymen of
the episcopal church protested against the book, and all the bishops
unanimously condemned it. The excitement had not yet subsided
when from South Africa oil was poured upon the flames. Bishop
Colenso of Natal (died 1883), who had zealously carried on the mission
there, but had openly expressed the conviction that it is unwise, unscriptural,
and unchristian to make repudiation by Caffres living in
polygamy, of all their wives but one, a condition of baptism, had
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
occasioned still greater offence by publishing in 1863 in seven vols. a
prolix critical disquisition on the Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua,
in which he contested the authenticity and unconditional credibility
of these books by arguments familiar long ago but now quite antiquated
and overthrown in Germany. During a journey to England
undertaken for his defence he was excommunicated and deposed by a
synod of the South African bishops in Capetown. The Privy Council,
as supreme ecclesiastical court in England, cleared him, as well as the
authors of the Essays, from the charge of heresy. An important aid
for the dissemination of liberal religious views is afforded by the
Hibbert Lectureship. Robert Hibbert (died 1849), a wealthy private
gentleman in London, assigned the yearly interest of a considerable
sum for <q>the spreading of Christianity in its simplest form as well
as the furthering of the unfettered exercise of the individual judgment
in matters of religion.</q> The Hibbert trustees are eighteen laymen
who dispense the revenues in supplementing the salaries of poorly
paid clergymen of liberal views, in providing bursaries for theological
students at home and abroad, and in other such like ways, but since
1878 especially, by advice of distinguished scholars, in the endowment
of annual courses of lectures, afterwards published, on subjects in the
domain of philosophy, biblical criticism, the comparative science of
religion and the history of religion. The first Hibbert Lecturer was
the celebrated Oxford professor, Max Müller, in 1878. Among other
lecturers may be named Renan of Paris in 1880; Kuenen of Leyden
in 1882; Pfleiderer of Berlin, in 1885. The battle waged with great
passionateness on both sides since 1869 for and against the removal
of the Athanasian Creed, or at least its anathemas, from the liturgy
has not yet been brought to any decided result.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Protestant Dissenters in England.</emph>&mdash;Down nearly to the end of the
eighteenth century all the enactments and restrictions of the Toleration
Act of 1689 (<ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>§ 155, 3</ref>) continued in full force. But in 1779 the obligation
of Protestant dissenters to subscribe the Thirty-nine Articles
was abolished, and the acknowledgment of the Bible as God's revealed
word substituted. The right of founding schools of their own, hitherto
denied them, was granted in 1798. In 1813 the Socinians were
also included among the dissenters who should enjoy these privileges.
After a severe struggle the <emph>Corporation and Test Acts</emph> were set aside
in 1826, affording all dissenters entrance to Parliament and to all
civil offices. The necessity of being married and having their children
baptized in an episcopal church was removed by the Marriage
and Registration Act of 1836 and 1837, and divorce suits were
removed from the ecclesiastical to a civil tribunal in 1857. In 1868
compulsory church rates for the episcopal parish church were
abolished. Lord Russell's University Bill of 1854, by restricting subscription
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
of the Thirty-nine Articles to the theological students,
opened the universities of Oxford and Cambridge to dissenters, while
the University Tests Bill of 1871 made the adherents of all religious
confessions eligible for all university honours and emoluments at
both seminaries. Thus one restriction after another was removed,
so that at last the episcopal church has nothing of her exclusive
privileges left beyond the rank and title of a state church, and the
undiminished possession of all her ancient property, from which her
prelates draw princely revenues.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Scotch Marriages in England.</emph>&mdash;The saints of the English Revolution
had indeed resolved in 1653 to introduce civil marriage (<ref target='Section_162_Para_1'>§ 162,
1</ref>). But the reaction under Cromwell set this unpopular law aside,
and the Restoration made marriage by an Anglican clergyman,
even for dissenters, an indispensable condition of legal recognition.
But in no country, especially among the higher orders, were private
marriages, without the knowledge and consent of the family, so
frequent as here, and clergymen were always to be found unscrupulous
enough to celebrate such weddings in taverns or other convenient
places. When an end had been put to such irregularities on
English soil by an Act of Parliament of 1753, lovers seeking secret
marriage betook themselves to Scotland. In that country there prevailed,
and still prevails, the theory that a declaration of willingness
on both sides constitutes a perfectly valid marriage. The Scottish
ecclesiastical law indeed requires church proclamation and ceremony,
but failure to observe this requirement is followed only by a small
pecuniary fine. Fugitive English couples generally made the necessary
declaration before a blacksmith at Gretna-Green, who was also
justice of the peace in this small border village, and were then
legitimately married people according to Scottish law. Only in
1856 were all marriages performed in this manner without previous
residence in Scotland pronounced by Act of Parliament invalid.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>The Scottish State Church.</emph>&mdash;The Presbyterian Church of Scotland,
from the beginning strictly Calvinistic in constitution, doctrine and
practice, has, generally speaking, preserved this character. Only in
recent times has the endeavour of the so-called <emph>Moderates</emph> to introduce
a milder type of doctrine won favour. The Established Church, as a
national church properly so-called and recognised by law, dates from
the political union of England and Scotland in the kingdom of Great
Britain in 1707, and the Anglican Episcopal Church there was then
reduced to a feebly represented dissenting denomination. Patronage,
set aside indeed in the Reformation age, but restored under Queen
Anne in 1712, and since then, in spite of all opposition from the
stricter party, continued, because often misused to secure the intrusion
of inacceptable ministers upon congregations, gave occasion to
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
repeated secessions. Thus the <emph>Secession Church</emph> broke off in 1732, and
the <emph>Relief Church</emph> in 1752, the latter going beyond the former's protest
against patronage by unconditional repudiation of Erastianism,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the theory of the necessary connection of Church and State
(§ 144, 1), and the assertion of the spiritual independence of the
church, and expressed firmly the principles of Voluntaryism, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the
payment of all ecclesiastical officers, etc., by voluntary contributions.
Both parties united in 1847 in the <emph>United Presbyterian Church</emph>, which
now embraces one-fifth of the population.&mdash;Twice that number joined
the secession of the Free Church in 1843. The General Assembly of
the Church of Scotland granted to congregations in 1834 the right
of vetoing presentations to vacancies. The civil courts, however,
upheld the absolute right of patrons, and at the Assembly of 1843
about two hundred of the most distinguished ministers, with the
great Dr. Chalmers (died 1847) at their head, left the state church,
and, as <emph>Non-Intrusionists</emph>, founded the <emph>Free Church of Scotland</emph>, which
at its own cost formed new parishes and distinguished itself by
Christian zeal in every direction. It differs from the <emph>United Presbyterian
Church</emph> in restricting its opposition to the abuse of patronage,
without repudiating right off every sort of state aid and endowment
as unevangelical. But even to it the law passed in 1846, granting to
all congregations the right of veto, seemed now no longer a sufficient
motive to return to the state church. Even when in 1874, parliament,
at the call of the government, formally abolished the rights of
patronage through all Scotland and gave to the congregations the
right of choosing their own ministers, the General Assembly of the
Free Church by a great majority refused to reunite with the state
church brought so near it, because it conceded to the civil courts
unwarrantable interference with its internal affairs, especially the
right of suspending its clergy.<note place='foot'>The very confused, wholly inadequate, and in some points positively
incorrect statements in the above paragraph may be supplemented
and amended by reference to the following literature:
Buchanan, <q>Ten Years' Conflict.</q> 2 vols. Edin., 1852. Moncrieff,
<q>Vindication of the Claim of Right.</q> Edin., 1877. Moncrieff, <q>The
Free Church Principle: its Character and History.</q> Edin., 1883.
Mackerrow, <q>History of the Secession Church.</q> Glasgow, 1841.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>Scottish Heresy Cases.</emph>&mdash;The Glasgow presbytery lodged before the
United Presbyterian Synod in Edinburgh of 1878 a charge against
the Rev. Fergus Ferguson of heresy, because his teaching was in
conflict with the church doctrine of the atonement in saying that
sinners, apart from Christ's intervention, would not suffer eternal
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
punishment but extinction, and that the same fate still lay before
unbelievers and the impenitent. After five days' violent discussion,
the majority of the synod, while strongly dissenting from his views
and urging him to avoid it in his preaching and catechising, resolved
to retain him in office as having proved his adherence to the orthodox
doctrine of the atonement. But when, at next year's synod, the Rev.
D. Macrae of Gourock asserted that, in spite of the Westminster
Confession, it was allowable for ministers to deny the eternity of
punishment, and would not promise to preach otherwise, he was
unanimously deposed.&mdash;Far more exciting and long continued were
the proceedings begun in the Free Church in 1876, against Professor
Robertson Smith of Aberdeen, who was charged before his presbytery
with offensive statements about angels, but especially with
contradicting the inspiration of Scripture by contesting the Mosaic
authorship of Deuteronomy. After various proposals of deposition,
suspension, rebuke, acquittal, had been made, the General Assembly
of 1880, after much deliberation and discussion, by a majority found
the charge of heterodoxy not proven, but earnestly exhorted the accused
to greater circumspection and moderation, and the decision was
greeted with thundering applause from the students and waving of
handkerchiefs from the ladies present. But when, very soon after
this acquittal, several other contributions by him appeared in the
<emph>Encyclopædia Britannica</emph>, on the Hebrew Language and Literature,
and Haggai, in the spirit of the Wellhausen criticism (<ref target='Section_182_Para_18'>§ 182, 18</ref>), as
also an article on Animal Worship among the Arabians and in the
Old Testament, in the <emph>Journal of Philology</emph>, the <emph>Commission</emph> sitting in
Edinburgh reinstituted proceedings against him. In October, 1880,
Smith vindicated before that court his scientific attitude toward the
Old Testament, maintaining that a moderate criticism of the biblical
books was reconcilable with the maintenance of their inspired
authority. The majority of the Commission, however, voted for his
expulsion from his chair. Smith protested both against the competence
and against the judgment of the Commission, but declared
himself ready to submit to the judgment of the General Assembly.
Meanwhile he accepted an invitation from Glasgow to deliver public
lectures there on the Old Testament, which were received with extraordinary
favour. This course was published under the title:
<q><emph>The Old Testament in the Jewish Church</emph>.</q> The General Assembly
of May, 1881, now decided by a large majority to remove him from
his academical chair, with retention of his license and his professor's
salary, which latter, however, Smith declined. But his numerous
sympathizers presented him with a scientific library worth £3,000,
and promised an annual stipend equal to his former salary. In 1883
he received the appointment as Professor of Arabic in Cambridge
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
and the large revenues of that office allowed him to decline the offer
of his friends.<note place='foot'>Smith's appointment was to the Lord Almoner's Professorship,
with a merely nominal salary; but he was afterwards elected to the
more remunerative office of University librarian, and more recently
has succeeded Prof. Wright in the Chair of Arabic in the University.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>The Catholic Church in Ireland.</emph>&mdash;The Catholic inhabitants of
Ireland under Protestant proprietors, and forced to pay tithes for
the support of the Protestant clergy, were always deprived of civil
rights. In 1809 O'Connell (died 1847), an agitator of great popular
eloquence, placed himself at the head of the oppressed people, in order
in a constitutional way to secure religious and political freedom
and equality. At last, in 1829, the Emancipation Bill, supported by
Peel and Wellington, was passed, which on the basis of the formal
declaration of the whole Catholic episcopate that papal infallibility
and papal sovereignty in civil matters was not part of the Catholic
faith nor could be joined therewith either in Ireland or anywhere
else in the Catholic world, gave to Catholics admission to parliament
and to all civil and military appointments. But the hated tithes
remained, and were enforced, when refused, by military force. After
long debates in both houses of parliament, the Tithes Bill was
adopted in 1838, which transferred the tithe as a land-tax from
tenants to proprietors, which, however, was only a postponing of the
question. It was thus regarded by O'Connell. He declared that
justice for Ireland could only be got by abolishing the legislative
union with Great Britain existing since 1800, and restoring her
independent parliament. For this purpose he organized the Repeal
Association. In 1840 another no less powerful popular agitator arose
in the person of the Irish Capuchin, Father Mathew, the apostle of
temperance, who with unparalleled success persuaded thousands of
those degraded by drink to take vows of abstinence from spirituous
liquors. He kept apart from all political agitation, but the fruits
of his exertions were all in its favour. O'Connell in 1843 organized
monster meetings, attended by hundreds of thousands. The government
had him tried, the jury found him guilty, but the House of
Lords quashed the conviction and liberated him from prison in 1844.
The Peel ministry now sought to soothe the excitement by passing
in 1845 the Legacy Act, which allowed Catholics to hold property in
their own names, and the Maynooth Bill, by which the theological
seminary at Maynooth received a rich endowment from the State.
Continued famine, and consequent emigration of several hundreds
of thousands to America and Australia, relieved Ireland of a considerable
portion of its Catholic population, while Protestant missions
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
by Bible and tract circulation and by schools had some success in
evangelizing those who remained. On November 5th, 1855, the
anniversary of the Gunpowder Plot, the Redemptorists at Kingstown,
near Dublin, erected and burnt a great bonfire in the public streets
of Bibles which they had seized, and the primate archbishop of
Ireland justified it by reference to the example of the believers at
Ephesus (Acts xix. 19).
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_10'/>
10. The Fenian movement, originating among the American Irish,
which since 1863 created such terror among the English, was the
result of political rather than religious agitation. Although this
movement failed in its proper end, namely the complete separation
of Ireland from England, it yet forced upon the government the
conviction of the absolute necessity of meeting the just demands of
the Irish by thorough-going reforms and putting an end to the
oppressions which the native farmers suffered at the hands of foreign
landowners, and the grievances endured by the Catholic church by
the maintenance of the Anglican church established in Ireland.
The carrying out of these reforms was the service rendered by the
Gladstone ministry. By the Irish Land Bill of 1870 the land question
was solved according to the demands of justice, and by the Irish
Church Bill of 1869, which deprived the Anglican church in Ireland
of the character of a state church and put it on the same footing
as other denominations, the church question was similarly settled.
The dignitaries of the Anglican church thus lost their position as
state officials and their seats in the House of Lords. The rich property
of the hitherto established church was calculated and applied
partly to compensating for losses caused by this reform, partly to
creating benevolent institutions for the general good. But neither
the Church Bill, nor the Land Bill, nor the Universities Bill, which
in 1880 founded by state aid a Catholic university in Dublin, secured
the reconciliation of the Irish. <q>Eternal hatred of England</q> was
and is the battle cry; <q>Ireland for the Irish, and only for them,</q>
is their watchword. In order to carry out this scheme an Irish
<q>National League</q> was formed, and innumerable secret <q>Moonlighters,</q>
under the supposed leadership of <q>Captain Moonshine,</q>
committed atrocities by burning farm steadings and mutilating
cattle, murdering and massacring by dagger and revolver, petroleum
and dynamite, and directed their operations against the representatives
of the government, against proprietors who sought rent, against
tenants who paid rent, against officials who endeavoured to enforce
it, and against everything that was, or was called, English. In order
to cut at the root of this lawlessness, which by proclamation of a state
of siege was only restricted, not overthrown, the government of 1881
passed further agrarian reforms: All tenant rights were to be purchased
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
by the surplus of the fund formed by the disestablishment of
the Irish church, and where this did not suffice, by state grants, and
the right to conclude contracts for rent and to determine its amount
was transferred from the proprietors to a newly-constituted land
court, without whose permission, after the lapse of the fifteen years'
term, no rent contract could be made. But even this did not stop
almost daily repeated murders and acts of destruction. The government
now sought the aid of the pope through the mediation of a
Catholic member of parliament on a visit to Rome; but these merely
confidential negotiations led to no considerable result. In May, 1883,
the curia, on the occasion of a collection promoted by the National
League as a magnificent national present to the great (Protestant)
leader of the agitation, Mr. Parnell, in a circular letter, forbad
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>proprio motu</foreign>,</q> the bishops in the strictest manner taking any part
in the movement, and urged them to dissuade their members from
doing so. But only Archbishop McCabe of Dublin (died 1885), from
the first an opponent of the League, issued a pastoral against it to be
read in all the pulpits of his diocese. The other bishops ignored the
papal command, and among the Catholic people the opinion obtained
that they owed to the pope obedience in spiritual but not in political
matters. The collections for the Parnell fund were continued with
redoubled zeal. The attempts of dynamitards, supplied with materials
by their American compatriots, and other agrarian offences have not
yet been finally stopped.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_11'/>
11. <emph>The Catholic Church in England and Scotland.</emph>&mdash;The Emancipation
Act, passed mainly for the relief of the Irish, naturally also benefited
English Catholics, who in 1791 had been allowed to hold Catholic
services. Led by the numerous accessions of Puseyites to entertain
the most extravagant hopes, Pius IX. in 1850 issued a bull, by which
the Roman Catholic hierarchy in England was reinstituted with
twelve suffragan bishoprics under one archbishop of Westminster.
The bull occasioned great excitement in the Protestant population
(<emph>Anti-Papal Aggression</emph>), and the <emph>Ecclesiastical Titles Bill</emph> forbade the
use of ecclesiastical titles not sanctioned by the law of the land.
After the first excitement had passed, the Catholic bishops, at their
head the learned and brilliant and zealous ultramontane Cardinal
Archbishop Wiseman (died 1865), and his successor, surpassing him,
if not in genius and learning, at least in ultramontane zeal, the
Puseyite convert Manning, made a cardinal in 1875, used with
impunity their condemned titles, until in 1871 the Ecclesiastical
Titles Bill was formally revoked by act of parliament. Conversions
in noble families were particularly numerous in the later decades.
Since 1850 the number of Catholics in England and Scotland has
quadrupled. This has been caused in great part by Irish emigration,
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
for the middle and lower ranks of the English have scarcely been
affected by the conversion fever, which as the latest form of the
fitful humour of the English had so rich a harvest in the families
of the nobility. In 1780 all London had only one Catholic place
of worship, the chapel of the Sardinian embassy, which on June
2nd of that year was wrecked and burnt by a raging mob. Now
the English capital has two episcopal dioceses, ninety-four Catholic
churches and chapels (besides about 900 Anglican churches) with
313 clergymen, and forty-four cloisters. In the House of Lords sit
twenty-eight Roman Catholic peers, and in both countries there are
forty-seven Catholic baronets. Since 1847 England has a specifically
Catholic university at Kensington, under the episcopate, and with
the pope as its supreme head, which, however, with its poor staff of
teachers and its expensive course attracts but a few of the Catholic
youth of England. Since the Anti-Papal Aggression of 1850 failed,
the Protestant people have shown themselves comparatively indifferent
to such assumptions of the papacy.&mdash;In the Act of Union
of 1707 (<ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>§ 155, 3</ref>), <emph>Scotland</emph> was guaranteed the absolute exclusion of
every sort of Roman Catholic hierarchy for all time to come. But
in recent times the number of its Catholic inhabitants so greatly
increased, that Pius IX. in his last years, not unaided by the English
government, eagerly urged the re-establishment of the hierarchy, and
Leo XIII. was able at his first consistory of the college of cardinals
in March, 1878, to make appointments to the two newly-erected
archdioceses and their bishoprics. On the following Easter Sunday
the allocution relating thereto was read in all Catholic churches
in Scotland. The restoration was thus carried out in spite of all
protests and demonstrations of Scottish Protestants.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_202_Para_12'/>
12. <emph>German Lutheran Congregations in Australia.</emph>&mdash;Besides the dominant
Anglican church, emigration has led to the formation of a
considerable number of German Lutheran congregations, which are
distributed in three synods. 1. The Victoria Synod was founded in
1852 by pastor Göthe. It adopted at first the union platform, but
subsequently attached itself more decidedly to the Lutheran confession.
2. Pastor Karch, who in 1830 emigrated with a number of
Prussian Lutherans, in order to avoid the union, laid the foundation
of the Immanuel Synod. Since 1875 it has been supplied with
preachers from the missionary institute of Neuendettelsau. It is
distinguished by its missionary zeal for the conversion of the natives,
pursues with special interest the study of the prophetic word, and
makes chiliasm an open question which need not rend the church.
3. The South Australian Synod, on the other hand, is the decided
opponent of any sort of chiliasm, and has assumed an attitude of
violent antagonism to the Immanuel Synod.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_203'/>
<head>§ 203. France.</head>

<p>
In France, lauded as the eldest daughter of the church
after the overthrow of the first Empire, ultramontanism,
under the secret and open co-operation of the Jesuits, has
ever arisen with revived youth and vigour out of all the
political convulsions which have since passed over the land.
And though indeed Gallicanism seemed again to obtain
strength under the second Empire and, down to the close
of that period, found many able champions among learned
theologians like Bishop Maret (<ref target='Section_189_Para_1'>§ 189, 1</ref>), and even among
exalted prelates like the noble Archbishop Darboy of Paris,
a martyr of his office under the Commune (<ref target='Section_212_Para_4'>§ 212, 4</ref>), its influence
faded gradually, and in the latest phase of France's
political development, the third republic, seems utterly
to have disappeared, so that even the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</foreign></q>
which broke out in 1879 could not give it life again.&mdash;The
number of Protestant churches and church members,
in spite of bloody persecutions during the Bourbon restoration,
and many arbitrary restrictions by Catholic prefects
under the citizen king and the second Empire, by numerous
accessions of whole congregations and groups of congregations
through zealous evangelization efforts, by means of
school instruction, itinerant preaching, and Bible colportage,
has increased during the century fourfold. In the Reformed
church the opposition of methodistically tinctured orthodoxy,
reinforced from England and French Switzerland, and
rationalistic freethinking, led to sharp conflicts. Also in
the Lutheran church, more strongly influenced by Germany,
similar discussions arose, but a more conciliatory spirit
prevailed and violent struggles were avoided.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_203_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The French Church under Napoleon I.</emph>&mdash;In 1801 Napoleon as Consul
concluded with Pius VII. a Concordat which, adopting the concordat
of Francis I. (§ 111, 14), abandoning the pragmatic sanction of
Bourges, and only haggling about the limits to be fixed for the two
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
powers, gave no consideration to the idea of a wholesome internal
reform of the French Church: Catholicism is the acknowledged
religion of the majority of the French people; the church property
belongs to the state, with the obligation to maintain the clergy and
ordinances; the clergy who had taken the oath and those who were
expatriated were all to resign, but were eligible for election; new
boundaries were to be marked out for the episcopal dioceses with
reference to the political divisions of the country; the government
elects and the pope confirms the bishops, and these, with approval of
the government, appoint the priests. The one-sided <emph>Organic Articles</emph>
of the first Consul of 1802, which were annexed to the publication of
the Concordat as a code of explanatory regulations, made any proclamation
of papal orders and decrees of all foreign councils dependent
on previous permission of the government, as also the calling of
synods and consultative assemblies of the clergy. They further
ordained that all official services of the clergy should be gratuitous,
and transferred to the civil council the right and duty of strict
inquiry into any clerical breach of civil laws and any misuse or
excessive exercise of clerical authority. The thirty-first article,
however, created that unhappy order of <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Desservants</foreign> or curates, the
result of which was that interim appointments were made to most
of the benefices in order to squeeze state pay in supplement to the
inadequate ecclesiastical endowments, and so their holders were at
the absolute mercy of the bishops who could transport or dispense
with them at any moment. For further particulars about the
friendly and hostile relations of Napoleon and the pope, see <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>§ 185, 1</ref>.
By an imperial decree of 1810, the four articles of the Gallican
Church (<ref target='Section_156_Para_3'>§ 156, 3</ref>) were made laws of the Empire; and a French
National Council of 1811 sought to complete the reconstruction of
the church according to Napoleon's ideas, but proved utterly incapable
for such a task, and was therefore dissolved by the emperor
himself.&mdash;To pacify the Protestants, dissatisfied with the Concordat,
amid flattering acknowledgment of their services to the state, to
science and to the arts, an appendix was attached to the Organic
Articles, securing to them liberty of religious worship and political
and municipal equality with Catholics. For training ministers
for the Reformed Church a theological seminary was founded at
Montauban, and for Lutherans an academy with a seminary at
Strassburg. Napoleon also afterwards proved himself on every
occasion ready to help the Protestants. He was equally forward
in recognising public opinion in France. The National Institute
of France in 1804 offered a prize for an essay on the influence of
Luther's Reformation on the formation and advance of European
national life, and awarded it to the treatise of the Catholic physician
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
Villers (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Essai sur l'influence de la réf. de Luther</foreign>, etc.), which in all
respects glorified Protestantism. Even the Catholic clergy during
the first Empire exhibited an easy temper and tolerance such as was
never shown before or since. The obligatory civil marriage law
introduced by the Revolution in 1792, obtained place in the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Code
Napoléon</foreign> in 1804, and was with it introduced in Belgium and the
provinces of the Rhine.<note place='foot'>Jarvis, <q>The Gallican Church and the Revolution,</q> pp. 324-395.
London, 1882.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_203_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Restoration and the Citizen Kingdom.</emph>&mdash;The <emph>Charter</emph> of the
Bourbon Restoration under Louis XVIII. (1814-1824) and Charles X.
(1824-1830) made Catholicism the state religion and granted toleration
and state protection to the other confessions. A new concordat
concluded with Pius VII. in 1817, by which that of Napoleon
of 1801, with the Organic Articles of the following year, were abrogated,
and the state of matters previous to 1789 restored, was so
vigorously opposed by the nation, that the ministry were obliged to
withdraw the measure introduced in both chambers for giving it
legislative sanction. Ultramontanism, however, in its boldest form,
steadily favoured by the government, soon prevailed among the
clergy to such an extent that any inclination to Gallicanism was denounced
as heresy and intolerance of Protestantism lauded as piety.
In southern France the rekindled hatred of the Catholic mob against
the Reformed broke out in 1815 in brutal and bloody persecution.
The government kept silence till the indignation of Europe obliged
it to put down the atrocities, but the offenders were left unpunished.
Connivance in such lawlessness on the part of the government contributed
largely to its overthrow in the July revolution of 1830. The
Catholic Church then lost again the privilege of a state religion, and
the hitherto persecuted and oppressed Protestants obtained equal
rights with the Catholics. But even under the new constitutional
government of Orleans, ultramontanism soon reasserted itself. The
Protestants had to complain of much injury and injustice from
Catholic prefects, and the Protestant minister Guizot claimed for
France the protectorate of the whole Catholic world. The Reformed
Church meanwhile flourished, though vacillating between methodistic
narrowness and rationalistic shallowness, growing both inwardly and
outwardly, and also the Lutheran communities, which outside of
Alsace were only thinly scattered, enjoyed great prosperity. In the
February revolution of 1848 the Catholic clergy readily yielded obedience
to the citizen king Louis Philippe, and, on the ground that
the Catholic church is suited to any form of government which only
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
grants liberty to the church, did not refuse their benediction to the
tree of freedom with the sovereign people at the barricades.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_203_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Catholic Church under Napoleon III.</emph>&mdash;Louis Napoleon, as president
of the new republic (1848-1852), and still more decidedly as
emperor (1852-1870), inclined to follow the traditions of his uncle,
regarded the concordat of 1801 as still legally in force and seemed
specially anxious to arouse zeal for the Gallican liberties. Although
his bayonets secured the pope's return to Rome (<ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>§ 185, 2</ref>) and even
afterwards supported his authority there, he did not fulfil the heart's
wish of the emperor by the people's grace to place the imperial crown
upon his head in his own person. Severely strained relations between
the imperial court and the episcopate resulted in 1860 from a
pamphlet against the papacy inspired by the government (<ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>§ 185, 3</ref>).
Dupanloup, Bishop of Orleans, was one of the oldest and most determined
defenders of the interests of the papal see, and from Poitiers
the emperor was pretty openly characterized as a second Pilate. The
government did not venture directly to interfere between the two,
but reminded the bishops that the emperor's differences with the pope
referred only to temporal affairs. It also forbade the forming of
separate societies for the collecting of Peter's pence, and dissolved the
societies of St. Vincent, instituted for benevolent purposes, but misused
for ultramontane agitations. When Archbishop Desprez of Toulouse,
like his predecessors in 1662 and 1762, on May 16th, 1862, with pompous
phrases of piety appointed the jubilee festival of the <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>fait glorieux</foreign>,</q>
by which at Toulouse three hundred years before, by means of shameful
treachery and base breach of pledges 4,000 Protestants were murdered
(§ 139, 15), a shout of indignation rose from almost all French
journals and the government forbade the ceremonial. It also refused
permission to proclaim the papal encyclical with the syllabus (<ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>§ 185, 2</ref>)
and condemned several bishops who disobeyed for misuse of their
office. Under the influence of the ultramontane empress Eugenie,
however, the relation of the government to the curia and the higher
clergy of the empire, since the one could not do without the other,
became more friendly and intimate, till the day of Sedan, September
2nd, 1870, put an end to the Napoleonic empire and the temporal
power of the papacy which it had maintained.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_203_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Protestant Churches under Napoleon III.</emph>&mdash;After the revolution
of 1848, the Lutherans at an assembly in Strassburg and the Reformed
in Paris consulted about a new organization of their churches. But
as the latter resolved in order to maintain constitutional union amid
doctrinal diversity, entirely to set aside symbol and dogma, pastor
Fr. Monod and Count Gasparin, the noble defenders of French Protestantism,
lodged a protest, and with thirty congregations of the
strict party constituted a new council at Paris in 1849, independent of
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
the state, as the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Union des églises évangéliques de France</foreign> with biennial
synods. Louis Napoleon gave to the Reformed Church a central
council in Paris with consistories and presbyteries; to the Lutheran,
an annual general consistory as a legislative court and a standing
directory as an administrative court. The Lutheran theological
faculty at Strassburg with its vigorous unconfessional science represents
the westernmost school of Schleiermacher's theology. The
academy at Montauban, with Adolph Monod at its head, represents
Reformed orthodoxy, not strictly confessional but coloured by methodistic
piety, and Coquerel in Paris, was the head of the rationalistic
party of the Reformed national church. The lead in the reaction against
rationalism since 1830 has been taken by the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Société évangélique</foreign> at Paris,
which, aiming at the Protestantising of France, and using for this end
Bible colportage, tract distribution, the sending out of evangelists,
school instruction, etc., has developed an extraordinarily restless and
successful activity. It has been powerfully supported by the evangelical
society of Geneva. The number of Protestant clergymen in France
has steadily risen, and almost every year in and out of the Catholic
population new evangelical congregations have been formed, in spite
of endless difficulties put in the way by Catholic courts. In Strassburg,
in 1854, the Jesuits persuaded the Catholic prefects to recall and
arrest the revenues of the former St. Thomas institute, which since
the Reformation had been applied to the maintenance of a Protestant
gymnasium. The prefect of Paris, however, was instructed to desist
from his claims. In the speech from the throne in 1858, the emperor
declared that the government secured for Protestants full liberty of
worship, without forgetting, however, that Catholicism is the religion
of the majority, and the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Moniteur</foreign> commented on this imperial speech
so evidently in the spirit of the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Univers</foreign>, that the prefects could not be
in doubt how to understand it. By General Espinasse, who, after the
Orsini attempt on the emperor's life in 1858, officiated for a long time
as Minister of the Interior, the prefects were expressly instructed, to
extend their espionage of the ill-affected press to the proceedings of
the evangelical societies, and to prohibit the colportage of Protestant
Bibles. On a change of minister, however, the latter enactment was
withdrawn, and only agents of foreign Bible societies were interfered
with. By an imperial decree of 1859, the right of permitting of the
opening of new Protestant churches and chapels was taken from the
local courts and transferred to the imperial council of state. For every
Protestant congregation, so soon as it numbered 400 souls, the legal
state salary for the clergymen would be paid.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_203_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Catholic Church in the Third French Republic.</emph>&mdash;The Gambetta
government, the national vindication of the 4th September, 1870, resigned
its power in February, 1871, into the hands of the National
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
Assembly elected by the whole nation, which, although through clerical
influence upon the electors predominantly monarchical and clerical,
appointed the old Voltairean Thiers (died, 1877), formerly ministerial
president under Louis Philippe, as alone qualified for the difficult
post of president of the republic. In the necessary second vote,
indeed, there was a considerable increase of the republican and as
such thoroughly anti-clerical party; but even in its ranks it was
admitted that the establishment of France as leader of all Europe
in the fight against ultramontanism and the co-operation therein
of the clergy were the absolutely indispensable means for the
political <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Revanche</foreign>, after which the hearts of all Frenchmen longed
as the hart for the water streams. A petition from five bishops
and other dignitaries to the National Assembly for the restoration
of the temporal power of the pope was set aside as inopportune.
But Archbishop Guibert of Paris, without asking the government,
proclaimed the infallibility dogma, and the minister of instruction,
Jules Simon, contented himself with warning the episcopate in a
friendly way against any further illegal steps of that kind. The
clerical party was also successful in its protest to the National Assembly
against the education law, which by raising the standard of
instruction, placing it under the supervision of the state and making
inspection of schools obligatory, proposed to put an end to the terrible
ignorance of the French people as the chief cause of their deep decay.
Bishop Dupanloup of Orleans was appointed president of the commission
for examining it, and so its fate was sealed. Meanwhile the
people, by frequent manifestations of the Virgin, were roused to a
high pitch of religious excitement. Crowds of pilgrims encouraged
by miraculous healings flocked to our Lady of La Salette, at Lourdes,
etc. (<ref target='Section_188_Para_6'>§ 188, 6</ref>), and the consecration of <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Notre Dame de la Deliverance</foreign> at
Bayeux was celebrated as a brilliant national festival. When in
May, 1873, Thiers gave way before the machinations of his opponents
and, under the new president, Marshal Macmahon, the thoroughly
clerical ministry of the Duc de Broglie got the helm of affairs, the
pilgrimage craze, mariolatry and ultramontane piety, aided by the
prefects and mayors, increased to an unparalleled extent among all
ranks. Under the Buffet ministry of 1875 the influence of clericalism
was unabated. To him it owed its most important acquisition, the
right of creating free Catholic universities wholly independent of the
State, with the privilege of conferring degrees. But when in 1876 the
new elections for the National Assembly gave an anti-clerical majority,
Buffet was obliged to resign. The new Dufaure ministry, with the
Protestant Waddington as minister of instruction, declared indeed
that it continued the liberty of instruction, but decidedly refused the
right of conferring degrees. The proposal to this effect met with the
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
hearty support of the new chamber of deputies. But all the greater
was the jubilation of the clericals when the senate by a small majority
refused its consent, and all the more eagerly was the founding of new
free Catholic universities carried on, at Paris, Angers, Lyons, Lille
and Toulouse, but notwithstanding every effort they only attracted a
very small number of scholars,&mdash;in 1879, when they flourished most,
at all the five there were only 742 students.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_203_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>The French <q>Kulturkampf,</q> 1880.</emph>&mdash;The Dufaure ministry was
succeeded in December, 1876, by the semi-liberal ministry of Jules
Simon, which again was driven out in a summary fashion by president
Macmahon on May 16th, 1877, and replaced, on the dissolution of
the chamber, by a clerical ministry under Duc de Broglie. But in the
newly elected chamber the republican anti-clerical majority was so
overwhelming that Macmahon, on January 30th, 1879, abandoning his
motto of government, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>J'y suis et j'y reste</foreign>, was at last obliged, between
the alternatives offered him by Gambetta, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Se soumettre ou se démettre</foreign>,
to choose the latter. His successor was Grévy, president of the
Chamber, who entrusted the protestant Waddington with the forming
of a new ministry in which Jules Ferry was minister of instruction.
Ferry brought in a bill in March to abolish the representation of the
clergy in the High Council of Education by four archiepiscopal deputies,
continuing indeed the free Catholic universities, but requiring
their students to enroll in a state university which alone could hold
examinations and give degrees, and finally enacting by Article 7 that
the right of teaching in all educational institutions should be refused
to members of all religious orders and congregations not recognised
by the state. The chamber deputies accepted this bill without
amendment on July 9th, but the senate on March 7th, 1880, after
passing six articles refused to adopt the seventh. On March 29th, the
president of the republic issued on his own authority two decrees,
based indeed upon earlier enactments (1789-1852), gone into desuetude
indeed, but never abrogated (<ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>§ 186, 2</ref>), demanded the dissolution of
the Society of Jesus, containing 1,480 members in 56 institutions,
within three months, and insisted that the orders and congregations not
recognised by the State, embracing 14,033 sisters in 602 institutions
and 7,444 brothers in 384 institutions, in the same time should by production
of their statutes and rules seek formal recognition or else be
broken up. A storm of protests on the part of the bishops greeted these
<q><emph>March Decrees</emph>,</q> and riotous demonstrations made before the Minister
of Instruction at his residence at Lille expressed the protests of the
students of the Catholic university there. The pope now broke his
reserve and by a nuncio sent the president of the republic a holograph
letter in which he declared that he must interfere on behalf of the
Jesuits and the threatened orders, because they were indispensably
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
necessary to the wellbeing of the church. He did not wish that
they should have recourse to unlawful means, but it must be understood
that they would appeal to the courts for protection of their
threatened civil liberties. When therefore on the morning of June
30th the police began their work of expelling the Jesuits from their
houses, these lodged a complaint before the courts of invasion of their
domestic peace and infringement of their personal liberty. Their
schools were closed on August 31st, the end of the school year; meanwhile
they had taken the precaution to transfer most of them to such
as would be ready afterwards to restore them. The enforcement of the
second of the March Decrees against the other orders was delayed for
a while. A compromise proposed by the episcopate, favoured by the
pope and not absolutely rejected even by the minister Freycinet,
Waddington's successor, according to which instead of the required
application for recognition all these orders should sign a declaration
of loyalty, undertaking to avoid all participation in political affairs
and to do nothing opposed to existing order, brought about the overthrow
of this ministry in September, 1880, by the machinations from
other motives of the president of the chamber and latent dictator,
Leon Gambetta. At the head of the new ministry was Ferry, who
held the portfolio of instruction, and under him the carrying out of
the second March Decree began on October 16th, 1880. Up to the
meeting of the chamber in November 261 monasteries had been
vacated; the rest, as from the first all female congregations, were
spared, so that France with its colonies and mission stations still
number 4,288 male and 14,990 female settlements of spiritual orders,
the former with about 32,000, the latter with about 166,200 inmates.&mdash;The
expulsion of the Jesuits, as well as the more recent of the other
orders, was, however, stoutly opposed. The police told off for this
duty found doors shut and barricaded against them or defended by
fanatical peasants and mobs of shrieking women, so that they had
often to be stormed and broken up by the military. Still more threatening
than this opposition was the reaction which began to assert
itself at the instance of the almost thoroughly ultramontane jurists
of the country, a survival of the times of Napoleon III. and Macmahon.
An advocate Rousse, who publicly stated the opinion that the March
Decrees were illegal and therefore not binding, was supported by 2,000
attorneys and over 200 corporations of attorneys and by many distinguished
university jurists. More than 200 state officials and many
judiciary and police officers, together with several officers of the army,
tendered their resignations so as to avoid taking part in the execution
of the decrees. When it became clear that unfavourable verdicts
would be given by the courts invoked by the Jesuits against the
executors of the decree, as indeed was soon actually done by several
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
courts, the government lodged an appeal against their competence
before the tribunal of conflicts which also actually in regard to all
such cases pronounced them incompetent and their decisions therefore
null and void; but the complainers insisted that their complaints
should be taken to a Council of State as the only court suitable to
deal with charges against officials, which, as might be expected, was
not done.
</p>

<p>
7. In the future course of the French <q>Kulturkampf</q> the most
important proceedings of the government were the following: The
abolition of the institute of military chaplains, highly serviceable in
ultramontanizing the officers, was carried out in 1880, as well as the
requirement that the clergy and teachers should give military service
for one year, and subsequently also military escorts to the Corpus
Christi procession were forbidden. In 1880 the Municipal Council of
Paris, with the concurrence of the prefect of the Seine, forbad the
continuance of the beautiful building of the church of the Heart of
Jesus begun in 1875 on Montmartre (<ref target='Section_188_Para_12'>§ 188, 12</ref>), confiscating the site
that had been granted for it. In 1881 the churchyards were relieved
of their denominational character, and the following year the right
of managing them, with permission of merely civil interment without
the aid of a clergyman, was transferred from the ecclesiastical to the
civil authorities. By introducing in 1880 high schools for girls with
boarding establishments an end was put to the education of girls of
the upper ranks in nunneries, which had hitherto been the almost
exclusive practice. Far more sweeping was the School Act brought
in by the radical minister of worship, Paul Bert, and first enforced in
October, 1886, which made attendance compulsory, relegated religious
instruction wholly to the church and home, and absolutely excluded
all the clergy from the right of giving any sort of instruction in the
public schools, and demanded the removal of all crucifixes and other
religious symbols from the school buildings. In December, 1884, a
tax was imposed on the property of all religious orders, also the state
allowance for the five Catholic seminaries with only thirty-seven
students was withdrawn, and many other important deductions made
upon the budget for Catholic worship, which at first the senate opposed,
but at last agreed to. The Divorce Bill frequently introduced
since 1881, which permitted parties to marry again, and gave disposal
of the matter to the civil court, got the assent of the senate only
in the end of July, 1884. The clericals were also greatly offended by
the decree passed in May, 1885, which closed the church of St. Genoveva,
the former Pantheon, as a place of worship and made it again a
burial place for distinguished Frenchmen. This resolution was first
carried out by placing there the remains of Victor Hugo. Amid these
and many other injuries to its interests the Roman curia, concentrating
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
all its energies upon the German <q>Kulturkampf,</q> endeavoured
to keep things back in a moderate way. Yet in July, 1883, the pope
addressed to president Grévy a friendly but earnest remonstrance,
which he treated simply as a private letter and, without communicating
it officially to his cabinet, answered that apart from parliament
he could not act, but that so far as he and his ministry were
able they would seek to avoid conflict with the holy see. And in fact
the government, especially after the overthrow of the Gambetta ministry
in 1882, often successfully opposed the proposal of the radical
chamber, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the separation of church and state, the abrogation of
the concordat, the recall of the embassy to the Vatican, the abolition
of religious oaths in the proceedings of the courts, the stopping of the
state subvention of a million francs for payment of salaries in seminaries
for priests, etc.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_203_Para_8'/>
8. <emph>The Protestant Churches under the Third Republic.</emph>&mdash;Since the
French Reformed began to emulate their Catholic countrymen in wild
Chauvinism, fanatical hatred of Germany and unreasoning enthusiasm
for the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Revanche</foreign>, they were left by the advancing clerical party unmolested
in respect of life, confession and worship during the time of
war. The Lutherans on the other hand, consisting, although on
French territory, mainly of German emigrants and settlers, even their
French members not so disposed to Chauvinistic extravagance, were
obliged to atone for this double offence by expulsion from house and
home and by various injuries to their ecclesiastical interests. After
the conclusion of peace, especially under Thiers' moderate government,
this fanaticism gradually cooled down, so that the expelled
Germans returned and the churches and institutions that had been
destroyed were restored, so far as means would allow. By the decree
of Waddington, the minister of instruction, of date March 27th, 1877,
instead of the theological faculty of Strassburg, now lost for the
French Lutheran church, one for both Protestant churches was
founded in Paris.&mdash;The <emph>Lutheran Church</emph>, in consequence of the cession
of Alsace-Lorraine, had only sixty-four out of 278 pastorates and
six out of forty-four consistories remaining. At the general synod
convened at Paris, in July, 1872, by the government for reorganising
the Lutheran church it was resolved: To form two inspectorates
independent of each other&mdash;Paris, predominantly orthodox, Mömpelgard,
predominantly liberal; the general assembly, which meets
every third year alternately at Mömpelgard and Paris, to consist
of delegates from both. The two inspectorates are to correspond in
administrative matters directly with the minister of public instruction,
but in everything referring to confession, doctrine, worship
and discipline, the general assembly is the supreme authority. In
regard to the confessional question they agreed to the statement,
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
that the holy Scripture is the supreme authority in matters of
faith, and the Augsburg Confession the basis of the legal constitution
of the church. An express undertaking on the part of the
clergy to this effect is not, however, insisted upon. Only in 1879
could this constitution obtain legal sanction by the State, and that
only after considerable modification in the direction of liberalism,
especially in reference to electoral qualification. In consequence of
this the first ordinary general assembly held in Paris in May, 1881,
found both parties in a conciliatory mood.&mdash;<emph>The Reformed Church</emph>, with
about 500 pastorates and 105 consistories, summoned by order of
government a newly constituted General Assembly at Paris, in June,
1872. Prominent among the leaders of the orthodox party was the
aged ex-minister Guizot; the leaders of the liberals were Coquerel
and Colani. The former supported the proposal of Professor Bois of
Montauban, who insisted on the frank and full confession of holy
Scripture as the sovereign authority in matters of faith, of Christ as
the only Son of God, and of justification by faith as the legal basis of
instruction, worship and discipline; while the latter protested against
every attempt to lay down an obligatory and exclusive confession.
The orthodox party prevailed and the dissenters who would not yield
were struck off the voting lists. When now in consequence of the
complaint of the liberal party the summoning of an ordinary general
assembly was refused by the government, the orthodox party repeatedly
met in <q>official</q> provincial and general assemblies without state sanction.
The council of state then declared all decisions regarding voting
qualifications passed by the synod of 1872 to be null and void, the
minister of worship, Ferry, ordered the readmission of electors struck
from the lists, and his successor Bert legalized, by a decree of March
25th, 1882, the division of the Parisian consistorial circuit into two
independent consistories of Paris and Versailles, moved for by the
liberal party but opposed by the orthodox. But upon the elections
for the new consistory of Paris, ordered in spite of all protests, and for
the presbyteries of the eight parishes assigned to it, contrary to all
expectation, in seven of these the elections with great majorities were
in favour of the orthodox, and the first official document issued by the
new consistory was a solemn protest against the decree to which it
owed its existence. Under such circumstances the government as
well as the liberal party had no desire for the calling of an official
general assembly, and the latter resolved at a general assembly at
Nimes, in October, 1882, to institute official synods of their own for
consultation and protection of their own interests.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_204'/>
<head>§ 204. Italy.</head>

<p>
In Italy matters returned to their old position after the
restoration of 1814. But liberalism, aiming at the liberty
and unity of Italy, gained the mastery, and where for the
time it prevailed, the Jesuits were expelled, and the power
of the clergy restricted; where it failed, both came back
with greatly increased importance. The arms of Austria
and subsequently also of France stamped out on all sides
the revolutionary movements. Pius IX., who at first was
not indisposed, contrary to all traditions of the papacy, to
put himself at the head of the national party, was obliged
bitterly to regret his dealings with the liberals (<ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>§ 185, 2</ref>).
Sardinia, Modena and Naples put the severest strain upon
the bow of the restoration, while Parma and Tuscany distinguished
themselves by adopting liberal measures in a
moderate degree. Sardinia, however, in 1840 came to a
better mind. Charles Albert first broke ground with a more
liberal constitution, and in 1848 proclaimed himself the
deliverer of Italy, but yielded to the arms of Austria. His
son Victor Emanuel II. succeeded amid singularly favourable
circumstances in uniting the whole peninsula under his
sceptre as a united kingdom of Italy governed by liberal
institutions.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_204_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Kingdom of Sardinia.</emph>&mdash;Victor Emanuel I. after the restoration
had nothing else to do but to recall the Jesuits, to hand over to
them the whole management of the schools, and, guided and led by
them in everything, to restore the church and state to the condition
prevailing before 1789. Charles Felix (1821-1831) carried still further
the absolutist-reactionary endeavours of his predecessor, and even
Charles Albert (1831-1849) refused for a long time to realize the hopes
which the liberal party had previously placed in him. Only in the
second decade of his reign did he begin gradually to display a more
liberal tendency, and at last in 1848 when, in consequence of the
French Revolution, Lombardy rose against the Austrian rule, he
placed himself at the head of the national movement for freeing Italy
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
from the yoke of strangers. But the king gloried in as <q>the sword
of Italy</q> was defeated and obliged to abdicate. Victor Emanuel II.
(1849-1878) allowed meanwhile the liberal constitution of his father
to remain and indeed carried it out to the utmost. The minister of
justice, Siccardi, proposed a new legislative code which abolished all
clerical jurisdiction in civil and criminal proceedings, as also the right
of asylum and of exacting tithes, the latter with moderate compensation.
It was passed by parliament and subscribed by the king in
1850. The clergy, with archbishop Fransoni of Turin at their head,
protested with all their might against these sacrilegious encroachments
on the rights of the church. Fransoni was on this account
committed for a month to prison and, when he refused the last sacrament
to a minister, was regularly sentenced to deposition and banishment
from the country. Pius IX. thwarted all attempts to obtain a
new concordat. But the government went recklessly forward. As
Fransoni from his exile in France continued his agitation, all the
property of the archiepiscopal chair was in 1854 sequestered and a
number of cloisters were closed. Soon all penalties in the penal code
for spreading non-Catholic doctrines were struck out and non-Catholic
soldiers freed from compulsory attendance at mass on Sundays and
festivals. The chief blow now fell on March 2nd, 1855, in the Cloister
Act, which abolished all orders and cloisters not devoted to preaching,
teaching, and nursing the sick. In consequence 331 out of 605 cloisters
were shut up. The pope ceased not to condemn all these sacrilegious
and church robbing acts, and when his threats were without result,
thundered the great excommunication in July, 1855, against all
originators, aiders, and abettors of such deeds. Among the masses
this indeed caused some excitement, but it never came to an explosion.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_204_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Kingdom of Italy.</emph>&mdash;Amid such vigorous progress the year 1859
came round with its fateful Franco-Italian war. The French alliance
had not indeed, as it promised, made Italy free to the Adriatic, but by
the peace of Villafranca the whole of Lombardy was given to the
kingdom of Sardinia as a present from the emperor of the French.
In the same year by popular vote Tuscany, including Modena and
Parma, and in the following year the kingdom of the two Sicilies, as
well as the three provinces of the States of the Church, revolted and
were annexed, so that the new kingdom of Italy embraced the whole of
the peninsula, with the exception of Venice, Rome and the Campagna.
Prussia's remarkable successes in the seven days' German war of 1866
shook Venice like ripe fruit into the lap of her Italian ally, and the
day of Sedan, 1870, prepared the way for the addition of Rome and the
Campagna (<ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>§ 185, 3</ref>).&mdash;In Lombardy and then also in Venice, immediately
after they had been taken possession of, the concordat with
Austria was abrogated and the Jesuits expelled. Ecclesiastical tithes
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
on the produce of the soil were abolished throughout the whole kingdom,
begging was forbidden the mendicant friars as unworthy of a
spiritual order, ecclesiastical property was put under state control
and the support of the clergy provided for by state grants. In 1867
the government began the appropriation and conversion of the church
property; in 1870 all religious orders were dissolved, with exception
for the time being of those in Rome, wherever they did not engage
in educational and other useful works. In May, 1873, this law was
extended to the Roman province, only it was not to be applied to the
generals of orders in Rome. Nuns and some monks were also allowed
to remain in their cloisters situated in unpeopled districts. The
amount of state pensions paid to monks and nuns reached in 1882 the
sum of eleven million lire, at the rate of 330 lire for each person. The
abolition of the theological faculties in ten Italian universities in 1873,
because these altogether had only six students of theology, was regarded
by the curia rather as a victory than a defeat. The newly
appointed bishops were forbidden by the pope to produce their
credentials for inspection in order to obtain their salaries from the
government. The loss of temporalities thus occasioned was made up
by Pius IX. out of Peter's pence flowing in so abundantly from
abroad; each bishop receiving 500 and each archbishop 700 lire in the
month. Leo XIII., however, felt obliged in 1879, owing to the great
decrease in the Peter's pence contributions, to cancel this enactment
and to permit the bishops to accept the state allowance. In consequence
of the civil marriage law passed in 1866 having been altogether
ignored by the clergy, nearly 400,000 marriages had down to the close
of 1878 received only ecclesiastical sanction, and the offspring of such
parties would be regarded in the eye of the law as illegitimate. To
obviate this difficulty a law was passed in May, 1879, which insisted that
in all cases civil marriage must precede the ecclesiastical ceremony,
and clergymen, witnesses and parties engaging in an illegal marriage
should suffer three or six months' imprisonment; but all marriages
contracted in accordance merely with church forms before the passing
of this law might be legitimized by being entered on the civil register.&mdash;Finally
in January, 1884, the controversy pending since 1873 as to
whether the rich property of the Roman propaganda (<ref target='Section_156_Para_9'>§ 156, 9</ref>) amounting
to twenty million lire should be converted into state consols was
decided by the supreme court in favour of the curia, which had pronounced
these funds international because consisting of presents and
contributions from all lands. But not only was the revenue of the
propaganda subjected to a heavy tax, but also all increase of its property
forbidden. In vain did the pope by his nuncios call for the
intervention of foreign nations. None of these were inclined to
meddle in the internal affairs of Italy. The curia now devised the
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
plan of affiliating a number of societies outside of Italy to the propaganda
for receiving and administering donations and presents.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_204_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Evangelization of Italy.</emph>&mdash;Emigrant Protestants of various
nationalities had at an early date, by the silent sufferance of the respective
governments, formed small evangelical congregations in some
of the Italian cities; in Venice and Leghorn during the seventeenth
century, at Bergamo in 1807, at Florence in 1826, at Milan in 1847.
Also by aid of the diplomatic intervention of Prussia and England,
the erection of Protestant chapels for the embassy was allowed at
Rome in 1819, at Naples in 1825, and at Florence in 1826. When in
1848 Italy's hopes from the liberal tendencies of Pius IX. were so
bitterly disappointed, Protestant sympathies began to spread far and
wide through the land, even among native Catholics, fostered by
English missionaries, Bibles and tracts, which the governments sought
in vain to check by prisons, penitentiaries and exile. Persecution
began in 1851 in Tuscany, where, in spite of the liberty of faith and
worship guaranteed by the constitution of 1848, Tuscan subjects taking
part in the Italian services in the chapel of the Prussian embassy at
Florence were punished with six months' hard labour, and in the
following year the pious pair Francesco and Rosa Madiai were sentenced
to four years' rigorous punishment in a penitentiary for the
crime of having edified themselves and their household by reading
the Bible. In vain did the Evangelical Alliance remonstrate (<ref target='Section_178_Para_3'>§ 178,
3</ref>), in vain did even the king of Prussia intercede. But when, stirred
up by public opinion in England, the English premier Lord Palmerston
offered to secure the requirement of Christian humanity by
means of British ships of war, the grand-duke got rid of both martyrs
by banishing them from the country in 1853. In proportion as the
union of Italy under Victor Emanuel II. advanced, the field for
evangelistic effort and the powers devoted thereto increased. So it was
too since 1860 in Southern Italy. But when in 1866 a Protestant congregation
began to be formed at Barletta in Naples, a fanatical priest
roused a popular mob in which seventeen persons were killed and torn
in pieces. The government put down the uproar and punished the
miscreants, and the nobler portion of the nation throughout the whole
land collected for the families of those murdered. The work of evangelization
supported by liberal contributions chiefly from England,
but also from Holland, Switzerland, and the German <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Gustav-Adolf-Verein</foreign>
(<ref target='Section_178_Para_1'>§ 178, 1</ref>), advanced steadily in spite of occasional brutal interferences
of the clergy and the mob, so that soon in all the large cities
and in many of the smaller towns of Italy and Sicily there were
thriving and flourishing little evangelical congregations of converted
native Catholics, numbering as many as 182 in 1882.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_204_Para_4'/>
4. The chief factor in the evangelization of Italy as far as the
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
southern coast of Sicily was the old <emph>Waldensian Church</emph>, which for three
hundred years had occupied the Protestant platform in the spirit of
Calvinism (§ 139, 25). Remnants consisting of some 200,000 souls
still survived in the valleys of Piedmont, almost without protection
of law amid constant persecution and oppressions (<ref target='Section_153_Para_5'>§ 153, 5</ref>), moderated
only by Prussian and English intervention. But when Sardinia
headed Italian liberalism in 1848 religious liberty and all civil rights
were secured to them. A Waldensian congregation was then formed
in the capital, Turin, which was strengthened by numerous Protestant
refugees from other parts of Italy. But in 1854 a split occurred
between the two elements in it. The new Italian converts objected,
not altogether without ground, against the old Waldensians that by
maintaining their church government with its centre in the valleys,
the so-called <q>Tables</q> and their old forms of constitution, doctrine and
worship, much too contracted and narrow for the enlarged boundaries
of the present, they thought more of Waldensianizing than of evangelizing
Italy. Besides, their language since 1630, when a plague
caused their preachers and teachers to withdraw from Geneva, had been
French, and the national Italian pride was disposed on this domain
also to unfurl her favourite banner <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Italia farà da se</foreign>.</q> The division
spread from Turin to the other congregations. At the head of the
separatists, afterwards designated the <q><emph>Free Italian Church</emph></q> (<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Chiesa
libera</foreign>), stood Dr. Luigi Desanctis, a man of rich theological culture
and glowing eloquence, who, when Catholic priest and theologian of
the inquisition at Rome, became convinced of the truth of the evangelical
confession, joined the evangelical church at Malta in 1847 and
wrought from 1852 with great success in the congregation at Turin.
After ten years' faithful service in the newly formed free church he
felt obliged, owing to the Darbyite views (<ref target='Section_211_Para_11'>§ 211, 11</ref>) that began to
prevail in it, to attach himself again in 1864 to the Waldensians, who
meanwhile had been greatly liberalised. He now officiated for them
till his death in 1869 as professor of theology at Florence, and edited
their journal <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Eco della verità</foreign>. This journal was succeeded in 1873 by
the able monthly <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Rivista Cristiana</foreign>, edited at Florence by Prof. Emilio
Comba.&mdash;After Desanctis left the <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Chiesa libera</foreign> its chief representative
was the ex-Barnabite father Alessandro Gavazzi of Naples. Endowed
with glowing eloquence and remarkable popularity as a lecturer, he
appeared at Rome in 1848 as a politico-religious orator, attached himself
to the evangelical church in London in 1850, and undertook the
charge of the evangelical Italian congregation there. He returned to
Italy in 1860 and accompanied the hero of Italian liberty, Garibaldi,
as his military chaplain, preaching to the people everywhere with his
leonine voice with equal enthusiasm of Victor Emanuel as the only
saviour of Italy and of Jesus Christ as the only Saviour of sinners.
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
He then joined the <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Chiesa libera</foreign>, and, as he himself obtained gradually
fuller acquaintance with evangelical truth, wrought zealously in
organizing the congregations hitherto almost entirely isolated from
one another. At a general assembly at Milan in 1870, deputies from
thirty-two congregations drew up a simple biblical confession of faith,
and in the following year at Florence a constitutional code was
adopted which recognised the necessity of the pastoral office, of annual
assemblies, and a standing evangelization committee. They now took
the name <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Unione della Chiesa libere in Italia</foreign>.</q> The predominantly
Darbyist congregations, which had not taken part in these constitutional
assemblies, have since formed a community of their own as
<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Chiesa Cristiana</foreign>, depending only on the immediate leading of the Holy
Spirit, rejecting every sort of ecclesiastical and official organization,
and denouncing infant baptism as unevangelical.&mdash;Besides these three
national Italian churches, English and American Methodists and
Baptists carry on active missions. On May 1st, 1884, the evangelical
denominations at a general assembly in Florence, with the exception
only of the Darbyist <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Chiesa Cristiana</foreign>, joined in a confederation to
meet annually in an <q>Italian Evangelical Congress</q> as a preparation
for ecclesiastical union. When, however, the various Methodist and
Baptist denominations began to check the progress of the work of
union, the two leading bodies, the Waldensians and the Free Church
party, separated from them. A committee chosen from these two
sketched at Florence in 1885 a basis of union, according to which the
Free Church adopted the confession and church order of the Waldensians,
subject to revision by the joint synods, their theological school
at Rome was to be amalgamated with the Waldensian school at
Florence, and the united church was to take the name of the <q>Evangelical
Church of Italy.</q> But a Waldensian synod in September,
1886, resolved to hold by the ancient name of the <q>Waldensian
Church.</q> Whether the <q>Free Church</q> will agree to this demand
is not yet known.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_205'/>
<head>§ 205. Spain and Portugal.</head>

<p>
No European country has during the nineteenth century
been the scene of so many revolutions, outbreaks and civil
wars, of changes of government, ministries and constitutions,
sometimes of a clerical absolutist, sometimes of a
democratic radical tendency, and in none has revolution
gone so unsparingly for the time against hierarchy, clergy
and monasticism, as in unfortunate Spain. Portugal too
passed through similar struggles, which, however, did not
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
prove so dreadfully disordering to the commonwealth as
those of Spain.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_205_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Spain under Ferdinand VII. and Maria Christina.</emph>&mdash;Joseph Bonaparte
(1808-1813) had given to the Spaniards a constitution of the French
pattern, abolishing inquisition and cloisters. The constitution which
the Cortes proclaimed in 1812 carried out still further the demands of
political liberalism, but still declared the apostolic Roman Catholic religion
as alone true to be the religion of the Spanish nation and forbad
the exercise of any other. Ferdinand VII., whom Napoleon restored
in December, 1813, hastened to restore the inquisition, the cloisters
and despotism, especially from 1815 under the direction of the Jesuits
highly esteemed by him. The revolution of 1820 indeed obliged him
to reintroduce the constitution of 1812 and to banish the Jesuits; but
scarcely had the feudal clerical party of the apostolic Junta with
their army of faith in the field and Bourbon French intervention
under the Duke of Angoulême again made his way clear, than he
began to crush as before by means of his Jesuit Camarilla every
liberal movement in church and state. But all the more successful
was the reaction of liberalism in the civil war which broke out after
Ferdinand's death under the regency of his fourth wife, the intriguing
Maria Christina (1833-1837). The revolution now erected an inquisition,
but it was one directed against the clergy and monks, and
celebrated its <foreign rend='italic'>autos de fe</foreign>; but these were in the form of spoliation of
cloisters and massacres of monks. Ecclesiastical tithes were abolished,
all monkish orders suspended, the cloisters closed, ecclesiastical goods
declared national property, and the papal nuncio sent over the
frontier. A threatening papal allocution of 1841 only increased the
violence of the Cortes, and when Gregory XVI. in 1842 pronounced
all decrees of the government null and void, it branded all intercourse
with Rome as an offence against the state.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_205_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Spain under Isabella II., 1843-1865.</emph>&mdash;Ferdinand VII., overlooking
the right of his brother Don Carlos, had, by abolishing the Salic law,
secured the throne to Isabella, his own and Maria Christina's daughter.
After the Cortes of 1843 had declared Isabella of age in her thirteenth
year, the Spanish government became more and more favourable to
the restoration. After long negotiations and vacillations under constantly
changing ministries a concordat was at last drawn up in 1851,
which returned the churches and cloisters that had not been sold,
allowed compensation for what had been sold, reduced the number of
bishoprics by six, put education and the censorship of the press under
the oversight of the bishops, and declared the Catholic religion the
only one to be tolerated. But although in 1854 the Holy Virgin was
named generalissima of the brave army and her image at Atocha had
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
been decorated by the queen with a band of the Golden Fleece, a
revolution soon broke out in the army which threatened to deal the
finishing stroke to ultramontanism. Meanwhile it had not fully permeated
the republican party. The proposal of unrestricted liberty to
all forms of worship was supported by a small minority, and the new
constitution of 1855 called upon the Spanish nation to maintain and
guard the Catholic religion which <q>the Spaniards profess</q>; yet no
Spaniard was to be persecuted on account of his faith, so long as he
did not commit irreligious acts. A new law determined the sale of
all church and cloister property, and compensation therefore by
annual rents according to the existing concordat. Several bishops
had to be banished owing to their continued opposition; the pope
protested and recalled his legates. Clerical influence meanwhile regained
power over the queen. The sale of church and cloister property
was stopped, and previous possessors were indemnified for what had
been already sold. Owing to frequent change of ministry, each of
which manifested a tendency different from its predecessor, it was
only in 1859 that matters were settled by a new concordat. In it the
government admitted the inalienability of church property, admitted
the unrestricted right of the church to obtain new property of any
kind, and declared itself ready to exchange state paper money for
property that had fallen into decay according to the estimation of the
bishops. The queen proved her Catholic zeal at the instigation of the
nun Patrocinio by fanatical persecution of Protestants, and hearty
but vain sympathies for the sufferings of the pope and the expatriated
Italian princes. Pius IX. rewarded Isabella, who seemed to him
adorned with all the virtues, by sending her in 1868 the consecrated
rose at a time when she was causing public scandal more than ever
by her private life, and by her proceedings with her paramour
Marforio had lost the last remnant of the respect and confidence of
the Spanish nation. Eight months later her reign was at an end.
The provisional government now ordered the suppression of the Society
of Jesus, as well as of all cloister and spiritual associations, and in
1869 the Cortes sanctioned the draught of a new civil constitution,
which required the Spanish nation to maintain the Catholic worship,
but allowed the exercise of other forms of worship to strangers and
as cases might arise even to natives, and generally made all political
and civil rights independent of religious profession.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_205_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Spain under Alphonso XII., 1875-1885.</emph>&mdash;When Isabella's son returned
to Spain in January, 1875, in his seventeenth year, he obtained
the blessing of his sponsor the pope on his ascending the throne,
promised to the Catholic church powerful support, but also to non-Catholics
the maintenance of liberty of worship. How he meant to
perform both is shown by a decree of 10th February, 1875, which,
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
abolishing the civil marriage law passed by the Cortes in 1870, gave
back to the Catholic church the administration of marriage and
matters connected therewith; for all persons living in Spain, however,
<q>who professed another than the true faith,</q> as well as for <q>the bad
Catholics,</q> to whom ecclesiastical marriage on account of church
censures is refused, liberty was given to contract a civil marriage;
but this did not apply to apostate priests, monks, and nuns, to whom
any sort of marriage is for ever refused, and whose previously
contracted marriages are invalid, without, however, affecting the
legitimacy of children already born of such connections.&mdash;Against
the draught of the new constitution, whose eleventh article indeed
affords toleration to all dissenting forms of worship, but prohibits
any public manifestation thereof outside of their place of worship
and burial grounds, Pius IX. protested as infringing upon the still
existing concordat in its <q>noblest</q> part, and aiming a serious blow
at the Catholic church. The Cortes, however, sanctioned it in 1876.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_205_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Evangelization of Spain.</emph>&mdash;A number of Bibles and tracts,
as well as a religious paper in Spanish called <foreign lang='es' rend='italic'>el Albo</foreign>, found entrance
into Spain from the English settlement at Gibraltar, without Spain
being able even in the most flourishing days of the restoration to
prevent it, and evangelical sympathies began more or less openly
to be expressed. Franc. Ruat, formerly a lascivious Spanish poet,
who was awakened at Turin by the preaching of the Waldensian
Desanctis, and by reading the Bible had obtained knowledge of
evangelical truths, appeared publicly after the publication of the
new constitution of 1855 as a preacher of the gospel in Spain. The
reaction that soon set in, however, secured for him repeated imprisonments,
and finally in 1856 sentence of banishment for life. He then
wrought for several years successfully in Gibraltar, next in London,
afterwards in Algiers among Spanish residents, till the new civil
constitution of 1868 allowed him to return to Spain, where, in the
service of the German mission at Madrid, he gathered around him
an evangelical congregation, to which he ministered till his death in
1878. While labouring in Gibraltar he won to the evangelical faith
among others the young officer Manuel Matamoros, living there as a
political refugee. This noble man, whose whole career, till his death
in exile in 1866, was a sore martyrdom for the truth, became the soul
of the whole movement, against which the government in 1861 and
1862 took the severest measures. By intercepted correspondence the
leaders and many of the members of the secret evangelical propaganda
were discovered and thrown into prison. The final judgment
condemned the leaders of the movement to severe punishment in penitentiaries
and the galleys. Infliction of these sentences had already
begun when the queen found herself obliged, by a visit to Madrid in
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
1863 of a deputation of the Evangelical Alliance (<ref target='Section_178_Para_3'>§ 178, 3</ref>), consisting
of the most distinguished and respected Protestants of all lands, to
commute them to banishment.&mdash;After Isabella's overthrow in 1868,
permission was given for the building of the first Protestant church
in Madrid, where a congregation soon gathered of more than 2,000
souls. In Seville an almost equally strong congregation obtained for
its services what had been a church of the Jesuits. Also at Cordova
a considerable congregation was collected, and in almost all the
other large cities there were largely attended places of worship.
Several of those banished under Isabella, who had returned after her
overthrow, Carrasco, Trigo, Alhama, and others, increased by new
converts who had received their theological training at Geneva,
Lausanne, etc., and supported by American, English and German
fellow-labourers, such as the brothers F. and H. Fliedner, wrought
with unwearied zeal as preachers and pastors, for the spreading and
deeper grounding of the gospel among their countrymen. With the
restoration of the monarchy in 1875, the oppression of the Protestants
was renewed with increasing severity. The widest possible interpretation
was given to the prohibition of every public manifestation
of dissenting worship in Article XI. of the constitution. The excesses
and insults of the mob, whose fanaticism was stirred up by the
clergy, were left unpunished and uncensured. Even the most sorely
abused and injured Protestants were themselves subjected to imprisonment
as disturbers of the peace. No essential improvement
in their condition resulted from the liberal ministry of Sagasta in
1881. Nevertheless the number of evangelical congregations continued
steadily though slowly to increase, so that now they number
more than sixty, with somewhere about 15,000 native Protestant
members.&mdash;Besides these an <foreign lang='es' rend='italic'>Iglesia Española</foreign> arose in 1881, consisting
of eight congregations, which may be regarded to some extent as a
national Spanish counterpart to the Old Catholicism of Germany.
Its founder and first bishop is Cabrera, formerly a Catholic priest,
who, after having wrought from 1868 in the service of the Edinburgh
(Presbyterian) Evangelization Society as preacher in Seville, and
then in Madrid, received in 1880 episcopal consecration from the
Anglican bishop Riley of Mexico (<ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>§ 209, 1</ref>), then visiting Madrid.
Although thus of Anglican origin, the church directed by him
wishes not to be Anglican, but Spanish episcopal. It attaches itself
therefore, while accepting the thirty-nine Articles of the Anglican
Church, in the sketch of its order of service in the Spanish language,
more to the old Mozarabic ritual (§ 88, 1) than to the Anglican
liturgy.<note place='foot'>Borrow, <q>The Bible in Spain.</q> 2 vols. London, 1843.</note>
</p>

<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_205_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Church in Portugal.</emph>&mdash;Portugal after some months followed
the example of the Spanish revolution of 1820. John VI. (1816-1826)
confirmed the new constitution, drawn up after the pattern of the
democratic Spanish constitution of 1812, enacting the seizure of
church property and the suppression of the monasteries. But a
counter revolution, led by the younger son of the king, Dom Miguel,
obliged him in 1823 to repudiate it and to return to the older constitution.
But he persistently resisted the reintroduction of the
Jesuits. After his death in 1826, the legitimate heir, Pedro I. of
Brazil, abandoned his claims to the Portuguese throne in favour
of his daughter Donna Maria II. da Gloria, then under a year old,
whom he betrothed to his brother Dom Miguel. Appointed regent,
Dom Miguel took the oath to the constitution, but immediately broke
his oath, had himself proclaimed king, recalled the Jesuits, and,
till his overthrow in 1834, carried on a clerical monarchical reign
of terror. Dom Pedro, who had meanwhile vacated the Brazilian
throne, as regent again suppressed all monkish orders, seized the
property of the church, and abolished ecclesiastical tithes, but died
in the same year. His daughter Donna Maria, now pronounced of
age and proclaimed queen (1834-1853), amid continual revolutions
and changes of the constitution, manifested an ever-growing inclination
to reconciliation with Rome. In 1841 she negotiated about
a concordat, and showed herself so submissive that the pope rewarded
her in 1842 with the consecrated golden rose. But the liberal Cortes
resisted the introduction of the concordat, and maintained the right
of veto by the civil government as well as the rest of the restrictions
upon the hierarchy, and the <foreign lang='pt' rend='italic'>Codigo penal</foreign> of 1882 threatened the
Catholic clergy with heavy fines and imprisonment for every abuse
of their spiritual prerogatives and every breach of the laws of the
State. In 1857 a concordat was at last agreed to, which, however,
was adopted by the representatives of the people not before 1859, and
then only by a small majority. Its chief provisions consist in the
regulating of the patronage rights of the crown in regard to existing
and newly created bishoprics. The relation of government to the
curia, however, still continued strained. The constitution declares
generally that the Catholic Apostolic Romish Church is the state
religion. A Portuguese who passes over from it to another loses
thereby his civil rights as a citizen. Yet no one is to be persecuted
on account of his religion. The erection of Protestant places of
worship, but not in church form, and also of burial grounds, where
necessary, is permitted.&mdash;Evangelization has made but little progress
in Portugal. The first evangelical congregation, with Anglican
episcopal constitution, was founded at Lisbon by a Spanish convert,
Don Angelo Herrero de Mora, who in the service of the Bible Society
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
had edited a revision of the old Spanish Bible in New York, and had
there been naturalized as an American citizen. Consisting originally
of American and English Protestants, about a hundred Spanish and
Portuguese converts have since 1868 gradually attached themselves
to it, the latter after they had been made Spanish instead of Portuguese
subjects. After the pattern of this mother congregation, two
others have been formed in the neighbourhood of Lisbon and one
at Oporto.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_206'/>
<head>§ 206. Russia.</head>

<p>
The Russian government since the time of Alexander I.
has sought amid many difficulties to advance the education
and enlightenment of the people, and to elevate the orthodox
church by securing a more highly cultured clergy, and to
increase its influence upon the life of the people; a task
which proved peculiarly difficult in consequence of the
wide-spread anti-ecclesiastical spirit (<ref target='Section_210_Para_3'>§ 210, 3</ref>) and the incomparably
more dangerous antichristian Nihilism (<ref target='Section_212_Para_6'>§ 212,
6</ref>).&mdash;The Catholic church, mainly represented in what had
before been the kingdom of Poland, had, in consequence of
the repeated revolutionary agitation of the Poles, in which
the clergy had zealously taken part by stirring up fanaticism
among the people and converting their religion and worship
into a vehicle of rebellion, so compromised itself that the
government, besides taking away the national political
privileges, reduced more and more the rights and liberties
granted to the church as such.&mdash;The prosperous development
of the evangelical church in Russia, which, through
the absolutely faultless loyalty of its members, had hitherto
enjoyed the hearty protection of the government, in 1845
and 1846, and afterwards in 1883, in consequence of
numerous conversions among Esthonian and Livonian peasants,
was checked by incessant persecutions.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_206_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Orthodox National Church.</emph>&mdash;The evangelical influences introduced
from the West during the previous century, especially among
the higher clergy, found further encouragement under Alexander I.,
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1801-1825. Himself affected by the evangelical pietism of
Madame Krüdener (<ref target='Section_176_Para_2'>§ 176, 2</ref>), he aimed at the elevation of the
orthodox church in this direction, founded clerical seminaries and
public schools, and took a lively interest in Bible circulation among
the Russian people. But under Nicholas I., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1825-1855, a reaction
proceeding from the holy synod set in which unweariedly sought to
seal the orthodox church hermetically against all evangelical influences.
Also during the reign of Alexander II., <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1855-1881, a reign
singularly fruitful in civil reforms, this tendency was even more
rigidly illustrated, while with the consent and aid of the holy synod
every effort was put forth to improve the church according to its
own principles. Specially active in this work was Count Tolstoi,
minister of instruction and also procurator of the holy synod. A
committee presided over by him produced a whole series of useful
reforms in 1868, which were approved by the synod and confirmed
by the emperor. While the inferior clergy had hitherto formed an
order by themselves, all higher ranks of preferment were now opened
to them, but, on the other hand, the obligation of priests' sons to
remain in the order of their fathers was abolished. The clamant
abuse of putting mere clerks and sextons to do the work of priests
was also now put a stop to, and training in clerical seminaries or
academies was made compulsory. Previously only married men
could hold the offices of deacon and priest; now widowers and
bachelors were admitted, so soon as they reached the age of forty
years. In order to increase the poor incomes many churches had
not their regular equipment of clergy, and instead of the full set
of priest, deacon, sub-deacon, reader, sexton, and doorkeeper, in the
poorer churches there were only priest and reader. Order was
restored to monastic life, now generally grown dissolute, by a fixed
rule of a common table and uniform dress, etc. In 1860 an Orthodox
Church Society for Missions among the peoples of the Caucasus,
and in 1866 a second for Pagans and Mohammedans throughout the
empire, were founded, both under the patronage of the empress.
The Russian church also cleverly took advantage of political events
to carry on missionary work in Japan (<ref target='Section_184_Para_6'>§ 184, 6</ref>). A society of the
<q>Friends of Intellectual Enlightenment,</q> founded in St. Petersburg
in 1872, aimed chiefly at the religious improvement of the cultured
classes in the spirit of the orthodox church by means of tracts and
addresses, while agreeing with foreign confessions as to the nature
and characteristics of the true church. Under Alexander III., since
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1881, the emperor's former tutor Pobedownoszew, with the conviction
of the incomparable superiority of his church, and believing
that by it and only by it could the dangerous commotions of the
present be overcome (<ref target='Section_212_Para_6'>§ 212, 6</ref>) and Russia regenerated, as procurator
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
of the holy synod has zealously wrought in this direction.&mdash;But
meanwhile a new impulse was given to the evangelical movement in
aristocratic circles by Lord Radstock, who appeared in St. Petersburg
in 1870. The addresses delivered by him in French in the salons of
the fashionable world won a success scarcely to be looked for. The
most famous gain was the conversion of a hitherto proud, worldly,
rich and popular Colonel of the Guards, called Paschcow, who now
turned the beautiful ball-room of his palatial residence into a prayer-meeting
room, and with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte proclaimed
successfully among high and low the newly won saving truth in a
Biblical evangelical spirit, though not without a methodistic flavour.
The excitement thus created led to police interference, and finally,
when he refused to abstain from spreading his religious views
among the members of the orthodox church by the circulation of
evangelical tracts in the Russian language, he was, at the instigation
of the holy synod and its all powerful procurator, banished
first from St. Petersburg and then in 1884 from the empire, whereupon
he withdrew to London.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_206_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Catholic Church.</emph>&mdash;After the Greeks in the old West Russian
provinces (§ 151, 3), who had been forcibly united to Rome in 1596,
had again in 1772, in consequence of the first partition of Poland,
come under Russian rule, the government sought to restore them
also to the orthodox national church. This was first accomplished
under Nicholas I., when at the synod of Polosk in 1839 they themselves
spontaneously expressed a wish to be thus reunited with the
mother church. Rome thus lost two million members. But the
allocution directed against this robbery by Gregory XVI. was without
effect, and the public opinion of Europe saw a case of historical
justice in this reunion, though effected not without severe measures
against those who proved obstinate and rebellious. Yet there always
remained a considerable remnant, about one-third of a million, under
the bishop of Chelun, in the Romish communion. But even these in
1875, after many disturbances with the prelate Popiel at their head,
almost wholly severed their connection with the pope, and were
again received into the bosom of the orthodox national church. In
a memorial addressed to the emperor for this purpose, they declared
they were led to this on the one hand by the continual endeavour of
the curia and its partisans, by Latinizing their old Greek liturgy and
Polandizing the people, to overthrow their old Russian nationality,
and on the other hand, by their aversion to the new papal dogmas of
the immaculate conception of Mary and the infallibility of the pope.&mdash;The
insurrection of the Poles against Russian rule in 1830, which
even Pope Gregory XVI. condemned, bore bitter fruits for the Catholic
church of that country. The organic statute of 1832 indeed secured
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
anew to the Poles religious liberty, but the bishops were prohibited
holding any direct communication with Rome, the clergy deprived of
all control over the schools, and the Russian law regarding mixed
marriages made applicable to that province. By an understanding
with the curia in 1847 the choice of the bishops was given to the
emperor, their canonical investiture to the pope. The mildness with
which Alexander II. treated the Poles and the political troubles in
the rest of Europe fostered the hope of restoring the old kingdom
of Poland. Reckless demonstrations were made in the beginning of
1861, pilgrimages to the graves of the martyrs of freedom were
organized, political memorial festivals were celebrated in churches,
a general national mourning was enjoined, mourning services were
held, revolutionary songs were sung in churches, etc. The Catholic
clergy headed the movement and canonized it as a religious duty.
In vain the government sought to put it down by making liberal
concessions, in vain they applied to Pius IX. to discountenance it.
When in October the country lay in a state of siege, and the military
forced their way into the churches to apprehend the ringleaders of
rebellion, the episcopal administrator, Bialobezeski, denounced that
as church profanation, had all the Catholic churches in Warsaw closed,
and answered the government's request to reopen them by making
extravagant demands and uttering proud words of defiance. The
military tribunal sentenced him to death, but the emperor commuted
this to one year's detention in a fortress, with loss of all his dignities
and orders. Meanwhile the eyes of the pope had at length been
opened. He now confirmed the government's appointment of Archbishop
Felinsky, who entered Warsaw in February, 1862, and reopened
the churches. After the suppression of the revolt in 1864, almost all
cloisters, as nurseries of revolution, were abolished; in the following
year the whole property of the church was taken in charge by the
State, and the clergy supported by state pay. The pope, enraged at
this, gave violent expression to his feelings to the Russian ambassador
at Rome during the New Year festivities of 1866, whereupon the
government completely broke off all relations with the curia. Consequently
in 1867 all the affairs of the Catholic church were committed
to the clerical college at St. Petersburg, and intercourse between
the clergy and the pope prohibited. Hence arose many conflicts
with Catholic bishops, whose obstinacy was punished by their being
interned in their dioceses. In 1869 the Russian calendar was introduced,
and Russian made the compulsory language of instruction.
But in 1870 greater opposition was offered to the introduction of
Russian in the public services by means of translations of the common
Polish prayer and psalm-books. Pietrowitsch, dean of Wilna, read
from the pulpit the ukase referring to this matter, but then cast it
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
together with the Russian translations into the flames, with violent
denunciations of the government, and gave information against himself
to the governor-general. He was agreeably to his own desire
imprisoned, and then transported to Archangel. The same sentence
was pronounced against several other obstinate prelates and clergy,
among them Archbishop Felinsky, and thus further opposition was
stamped out.&mdash;Leo XIII. soon after entering on his pontificate in
1878 took the first step toward reconciliation. His efforts reached
a successful issue first in February, 1883. The deposed prelates were
restored from their places of banishment, with promise of a liberal
pension, and were allowed to choose their residences as they pleased,
only not within their former dioceses. In their stead the pope consecrated
ten new bishops nominated by the emperor, who amid the
jubilation of the people entered their episcopal residences. With
reference to the Roman Catholic seminaries and clerical academies
at Warsaw, the curia granted to the government the right of control
over instruction in the Russian language, literature and history, but
committed instruction in canonical matters solely to the bishops,
who, after obtaining the approval of the government, appointed the
rector and inspector and canonical teachers. Vacant pastorates were
filled by the bishops, and only in the case of the more important was
the approval of the government required. As to the language to be
used, it was resolved that only where the people speak Russian were
the clergy obliged to employ that language in preaching and in
their pastoral work.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_206_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Evangelical Church.</emph>&mdash;The Lutheran church in Russia, comprising
two and a half millions of Germans, Letts, Esthonians and
Finns, is strongest in Livonia, Esthonia and Courland, is the national
church in Finland, and is also largely represented in Poland, in the
chief cities of Russia, and in the numerous German colonies in South
Russia. In 1832 it obtained, for the Baltic provinces and the scattered
congregations in central Russia, a church constitution and service
book, the latter on the basis of the old Swedish service book, the
former requiring all religious teachers in church and school to accept
the Formula of Concord. Annual provincial synods have the initiative
in calling in, when necessary for legislative purposes, the aid of
the general synod.&mdash;In Poland the Reformed and Lutheran churches
were in 1828 united under one combined consistory. By an imperial
ukase of 1849, however, the independent existence of both churches
was restored. Protestants enjoyed all civil rights and had absolute
liberty in the exercise of their religion; but in central Russia down to
recent times, when a more liberal spirit began to prevail, they were
prohibited putting bells in their churches. The old prohibition of
evangelical preaching and the teaching of religion in the Russian
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
tongue also continued; but the attempt made for some decades in St.
Petersburg and the surrounding district to preach the gospel to
Germans who had lost their mother tongue, in the Russian language,
has been hitherto ungrudgingly allowed by the government. Quitting
the national church or returning from it to a church that had
been left before, is visited by severe penalties, and children of mixed
marriages, where one parent belongs to the national orthodox church,
are claimed by law for that church. Only Finland counts among her
privileges the right of assigning children of mixed marriages to the
church of the father. The Lutheran church in Livonia, with the
island of Oesel, suffered considerable, and according to the law of the
land irreparable, loss by the secession of sixty or seventy thousand
Letts and Esthonians to the orthodox church under the widespread
delusion that thereby their economic position would be improved.
Disillusions and regret came too late, and the ever increasing desire
for restoration to the church forsaken in a moment of excitement
could only obtain arbitrary and insufficient satisfaction in Lutheran
baptism of infants seemingly near death, and in permission at irregular
intervals and without previous announcement to sit at the Lord's
Table according to the Lutheran rite. In 1865, not indeed legislatively
but administratively, the contracting of mixed marriages in the
Baltic provinces was permitted without the enforcement of the legal
enactment requiring that the children should be trained in the Greek
church. In Esthonia, however, in 1883 there was a new outbreak of
conversions in Leal, where five hundred peasants went over to the
orthodox church, declaring their wish to be of the same faith as the
emperor and the whole of the Russian people. By imperial decree in
1885 the suspension of the law against withdrawing again from the
national church, which had existed for twenty years, was abolished.
At the instigation of Pobedownoszew the Imperial Council granted an
annual subsidy of 100,000 roubles for furthering orthodoxy in the
Baltic provinces. No evangelical church could be built in these provinces
without the approval of the orthodox bishop of the diocese, and
any evangelical pastor who should dissuade a member of his church
from his purpose of joining the orthodox church, was liable to punishment.&mdash;In
order to supply the want of churches and schools,
preachers and teachers in the Lutheran congregations of Russia, a
society was formed in 1858 similar to the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Gustav-Adolfs-Verein</foreign>, under
the supervision of the General Consistory of St. Petersburg, which has
laboriously and zealously endeavoured to improve the condition of the
oppressed church.<note place='foot'>Lendrum, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ecclesia Pressa</foreign>: or, the Lutheran Church in the Baltic
Provinces,</q> in <emph>The Theological Review and Free Church College Quarterly</emph>, vol. ii. 310-330. C. H. H. Wright, <q>The Persecution of the
Lutheran Church in the Baltic Provinces of Russia,</q> in the <emph>British
and Foreign Evangelical Review</emph>, January, 1887.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_207'/>
<head>§ 207. Greece and Turkey.</head>

<p>
In the spirited struggle for liberty Greece freed herself
from the tyranny of the Turkish Mohammedan rule and
obtained complete civil independence. But the same princes
representing all the three principal Christian confessions,
who in 1830 gave their sanction to this emancipation within
lamentably narrow limits, in 1840 conquered again the Holy
Land for the Turks out of the hands of a revolting vassal.
And so inextricable were, and still are, the political interests
of the Christian States of Europe with reference to the East,
that in the London parliament of 1854 it could be affirmed
that the existence of Turkey in a condition of utter impotence
was so necessary, that if it did not exist, it would
require to be created. On two occasions has Russia called
out her whole military force to emancipate from the Turkish
yoke her Slavic brethren of a common race and common
faith, without being able to give the finishing blow to the
<q>sick man</q> who had the protection of European diplomacy.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_207_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Orthodox Church of Greece.</emph>&mdash;Deceived in their expectations
from the Vienna Congress, the Greeks tried to deliver themselves from
Turkish tyranny. In 1814 a <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Hetairia</foreign> was formed, branches of which
spread over the whole land and fostered among the people ideas of
freedom. The war of independence broke out in 1821. Its first result
was a fearful massacre, especially in Constantinople. The patriarch
Gregorius with his whole synod and about 30,000 Christians were in
three months with horrid cruelty murdered by the Turks. The
London Conference of 1830 at last declared Greece an independent
state, and an assembly of Greek bishops at Nauplia in 1833 freed the
national church of Greece from the authority of the patriarch of
Constantinople, who was under the control of Turkey. Its supreme
direction was committed to a permanent Holy Synod at Athens, instituted
by the king but in all internal matters absolutely independent.
The king must belong to the national church, but otherwise all
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
religions are on the same footing. Meanwhile the orthodox church is
fully represented, the Roman Catholic being strongest, especially in
the islands. The University of Athens, opened in 1856 with professors
mostly trained in Germany, has not been unsuccessful in its task even
in the domain of theology.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_207_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>Massacre of Syrian Christians, 1860.</emph>&mdash;The Russo-Turkish war
ending in the beginning of 1856, in which France and England, and
latterly also Sardinia took the part of the sick man, left the condition
of the Christians practically unchanged. For though the Hatti
Humayun of 1856 granted them equal civil rights with the Moslems,
this, however well meant on the part of the Sultan of that time,
practically made no improvement upon the equally well meant Hatti
Sherif of Gülhane of 1839. The outbreak of 1860 also proved how
little effect it had in teaching the Moslems tolerance towards the
Christians. Roused by Jesuit emissaries and trusting to French
support, the Maronites of Lebanon indulged in several provoking
attacks upon their old hereditary foes the Druses. These, however,
aided by the Turkish soldiery were always victorious, and throughout
all Syria a terrible persecution against Christians of all confessions
broke out, characterized by inhuman cruelties. In Damascus alone
8,000, in all Syria 16,000 Christians were murdered, 3,000 women taken
to the harems, and 100 Christian villages destroyed. After the
massacre had been stopped, 120,000 Christians wandered about without
food, clothing, or shelter, and fled hither and thither in fear of death.
Fuad Pasha was sent from Constantinople to punish the guilty, and
seemed at first to proceed to business energetically; but his zeal soon
cooled, and French troops, sent to Syria to protect the Christians,
were obliged, yielding to pressure from England, where their presence
was regarded with suspicion, to withdraw from the country in June,
1861.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_207_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>The Bulgarian Ecclesiastical Struggle.</emph>&mdash;The Bulgarian church, with
somewhere about two and a half million souls, was from early times
subject to the patriarch of Constantinople (§ 73, 3), who acted toward
it like a pasha. He sold the Bulgarian bishoprics and archbishoprics
to the highest bidders among the Greek clergy, who were quite
ignorant of the language of the country, and had only one end in view,
namely to recoup themselves by extorting the largest possible revenue.
No thought was given to the spiritual needs of the Bulgarians, preaching
was wholly abandoned, the liturgy was read in a language unknown
to the people. It was therefore not to be wondered at that
the Bulgarian church was for years longing for its emancipation and
ecclesiastical independence, and made every effort to obtain this from
the Porte. Turkey, however, sympathized with the patriarch till the
revolt in Crete in 1866-1869 and threatening political movements in
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
Bulgaria broke out. Then at last in 1870 the sultan granted the
establishment of an independent Slavic ecclesiastical province under
the designation of the Bulgarian Exarchate, with liberty to attach
itself to the other Slavic provinces upon a two-thirds majority of votes.
The patriarch Gregorius protested, but the Sublime Porte would not
thereby be deterred, and in May, 1872, Anthimos the Exarch elect was
installed. The patriarch and his synod now stigmatized <emph>Phyletism</emph>, the
struggle for a national church establishment, as accursed heresy, and
excommunicated the exarch and the whole Bulgarian church. Only
the patriarch Cyril of Jerusalem dissented, but he was on that account
on his return home treated with indignity and abuse and was
deposed by a synod at Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_207_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The Armenian Church.</emph>&mdash;To the Gregorian-Armenian patriarch at
Constantinople (§ 64, 3), equally with his orthodox colleague (§ 67, 7),
had been assigned by the Sublime Porte civil jurisdiction as well as
the primacy over all members of his church in the Turkish empire.
When now in 1830, at the instigation of France, an independent
patriarchate with equal rights was granted to the United Armenians
(§ 72, 2), the twofold dependence on the Porte and on the Roman
curia created difficulties, which in the meantime were overcome by
giving the patriarch, who as a Turkish official exercised civil jurisdiction,
a primacy with the title of archbishop as representative of
the pope. The United Armenians, like the other united churches of
the East, had from early times enjoyed the liberty of using their
ancient liturgy, their old ecclesiastical calendar, and their own church
constitution with free election of their bishops and patriarchs, and
these privileges were left untouched down to 1866. But when in that
year the Armenian Catholic patriarch died, the archbishop Hassun
was elected patriarch, and then a fusion of the two ecclesiastical
powers was brought about, which was expected to lead to absolute
and complete subjection under papal jurisdiction and perfect assimilation
with the Romish constitution and liturgy, at the same time
Hassun with a view to securing a red hat showed himself eager and
zealous in this business. By the bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Reversurus</foreign> of 1867 Pius IX.
claimed the right of nominating the patriarchs of all united churches
of the East, of confirming bishops chosen by these patriarchs, in cases
of necessity even choosing these himself, and deciding all appeals
regarding church property. But the Mechitarists of St. Lazzaro
(<ref target='Section_164_Para_2'>§ 164, 2</ref>) had already discovered the intriguing designs of France and
made these known among their countrymen in Turkey. These now,
while Monsignore Hassun was engaged combating the infallibility
dogma at the Vatican Council of 1870, drove out his creatures and
constituted themselves into a church independent of Rome, without
however, joining the Gregorian-Armenians. The influence of France
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
being meanwhile crippled by the Prussian victory, the Porte acquiesced
in the accomplished fact, confirmed the appointment of the
newly chosen patriarch Kupelian, and refused to yield to the pope's
remonstrances and allocutions. In 1874, however, it also recognised
the Hassun party as an independent ecclesiastical community, but
assigned the church property to the party of Kupelian, and banished
Hassun as a fomenter of disturbance, from the capital. The hearty
sympathies which on the outbreak of the Russo-Turkish war the
Roman curia expressed so loudly and openly for the victory of the
crescent over the schismatic Russian cross, made the Sublime Porte
again regard the Hassunites with favour, so that Hassun in September,
1877, returned to Constantinople, where the churches were given
over to his party and a great number of the Kupelianists were won
over to his side. He was eagerly aided not only by the French but
also by the Austrian ambassador, and the patriarch Kupelian, now
sorely persecuted from every side, at last resigned his position and
went in March, 1879, to Rome to kneel as a penitent before the pope.
By an irade of the sultan, Hassun was now formally restored, and
in 1880 he was adorned with a red hat by Leo XIII. Shortly before
this the last of the bishops of the opposing party, with about 30,000
souls, had given in his submission.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_207_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Berlin Treaty, 1878.</emph>&mdash;Frequent and severe oppression, refusal
to administer justice, and brutal violence on the part of the Turkish
government and people toward the defenceless vassals drove the
Christian states and tribes of the Balkan peninsula in 1875 into a
rebellion of desperation, which was avenged, especially in Bulgaria in
1876, by scandalous atrocities upon the Christians. When the half-hearted
interference of European diplomacy called forth instead of
actual reforms only the mocking sham of a pretended free representative
constitution, Russia held herself under obligation in 1877 to
avenge by arms the wrongs of her brethren by race and creed, but
owing to the threats of England and Austria could not fully reap the
fruits of her dearly bought victory as had been agreed upon in the
Treaty of San Stefano. By the <emph>Berlin Conference</emph>, however, of 1878 the
principalities of Roumania, Servia, and Montenegro, hitherto under
the suzerainty of Turkey, were declared independent, and to them, as
well as to Greece, at the cost of Turkey, a considerable increase of
territory was granted, the portion between the Balkans and the
Danube was formed into the Christian principality of Bulgaria under
Turkish suzerainty, but East Roumelia, south of the Balkans, now
separated from Bulgaria, obtained the rank of an autonomous province
with a Christian governor-general. To Thessaly, Epirus, and
Crete were granted administrative reforms and throughout the European
territory left to the Porte it was stipulated that full religious
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>
and political rights be granted to members of all confessions. The
administration of Bosnia and Herzegovina was given over to Austria,
and that of Cyprus, by means of a separate treaty, to England. The
greater part of Armenia, lying in Asia, belongs to Russia.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_208'/>
<head>§ 208. The United States of America.<note place='foot'>Baird, <q>Religion in the United States.</q> Glasgow, 1844. <q>Progress
and Prospects of Christianity in the United States.</q> London,
1851. Gorrie, <q>Churches and Sects in the United States.</q> New
York, 1850.</note></head>

<p>
The Republic of the United States of America, existing
since the Declaration of Independence in 1776, and recognised
by England as independent since the conclusion of
Peace in 1783, requires of her citizens no other religious
test than belief in one God. Since the settlers had often
left their early homes on account of religious matters, the
greatest variety of religious parties were gathered together
here, and owing to their defective theological training and
their practical turn of mind, they afforded a fruitful field
for religious movements of all sorts, among which the
revivals systematically cultivated by many denominations
play a conspicuous part. The government does not trouble
itself with religious questions, and lets every denomination
take care of itself. Preachers are therefore wholly dependent
on their congregations, and are frequently liable to
dismissal at the year's end. Yet they form a highly
respected class, and nowhere in the Protestant world is the
tone of ecclesiastical feeling and piety so prevailingly high.
In the public schools, which are supported by the State,
religious instruction is on principle omitted. The Lutheran
and Catholic churches have therefore founded parochial
schools; the other denominations seek to supply the want
by Sunday schools. The candidates for the ministry are
trained in colleges and in numerous theological seminaries.
</p>

<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_208_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>English Protestant Denominations.</emph>&mdash;The numerous Protestant denominations
belong to two great groups, English and German. Of
the first named the following are by far the most important: (1) <emph>The
Congregationalists</emph> are the descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers who
emigrated in 1620 (§ 143, 4). They profess the doctrines of the Westminster
Confession (<ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>§ 155, 1</ref>).&mdash;(2) <emph>The Presbyterians</emph>, of Scotch origin,
have the same confession as the Congregationalists, but differ from
them by having a common church government with strict Synodal
and Presbyterial constitution. By rejecting the doctrine of predestination
the Cumberland Presbyterians in 1810 formed a separate
body and have since grown so as to embrace in the south-western
states 120,000 communicants.&mdash;(3) <emph>The Anglican Episcopal Church</emph> is
equally distinguished by moderate and solid churchliness. Even
here, however, Puseyism has entered in and the Romish church has
made many proselytes. But when at the general conference of the
Evangelical Alliance at New York in 1873, bishop Cummins of
Kentucky took part in the administration of the Lord's Supper in
the Presbyterian church and was violently attacked for this by his
Puseyite brethren, he laid the foundation of a <q>Reformed Episcopal
Church,</q> in which secession other twenty-five Episcopal ministers
joined. They regard the episcopal constitution as an old and wholesome
ordinance but not a divine institution, also the Anglican liturgy
and <emph>Book of Common Prayer</emph>, though capable of improvement, while
they recognise the ordinations of other evangelical churches as valid,
and reject as Puseyite the doctrine of a special priesthood of the
clergy, of a sacrifice in the eucharist, the presence of the body and
blood of Christ in the elements, and of the essential and invariable
connection between regeneration and baptism.&mdash;(4) <emph>The Episcopal
Methodists</emph> in America formed since 1784 an independent body (<ref target='Section_169_Para_4'>§ 169,
4</ref>). Their influence on the religious life in the United States has been
extraordinarily great. They have had by far the most to do with
the revivals which from the first they have carried to a wonderful
pitch with their protracted meetings, inquiry meetings, camp meetings,
etc. They reached their climax in the camp meetings which,
under the preaching mostly of itinerant Methodist preachers frequently
in the forest under the canopy of heaven, produced religious
awakening among the multitudes gathered from all around. Day
and night without interruption they continued praying, singing,
preaching, exhorting; all the horrors of hell are depicted, the excitement
increases every moment, penitent wrestlings with sighs, sobs,
groans, convulsions and writhings, occur on every side; grace comes
at last to view; loud hallelujahs, thanksgivings and ascription of
praise by the converted mix with the moanings of those on <q>the
anxious bench</q> pleading for grace, etc. In San Francisco in 1874
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
there were <q><emph>Baby-Revivals</emph>,</q> at which children from four to twelve
years of age, who trembled with the fear of hell, sang penitential
hymns, made confession of sin, and wrote their names on a sheet
in order to engage themselves for ever for Jesus. Since 1847 the
Methodist church had been divided into two hostile camps, a southern
and a northern. The first named tolerated slavery, while the members
of the latter were decided abolitionists and excommunicated all slave-owners
as unworthy of the name of Christian. Another party, the
Protestant Methodists, has blended the episcopal and congregational
constitution.&mdash;(5) <emph>The Baptists</emph> are split up into many sects. The
most numerous are the Calvinistic Baptists. Their activity in
proselytising is equally great with their zeal for missions to the
heathen. In opposition to them the Free-Will Baptists are Arminian
and the Christian Baptists have adopted Unitarian views.<note place='foot'>Stevens, <q>History of the Episcopal Methodist Church in North
America.</q> Philadelphia, 1868. Gorrie, <q>History of the Episcopal
Methodist Church in the United States.</q> New York, 1881.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_208_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The German Lutheran Denominations.</emph>&mdash;The German emigration to
America began in Penn's time. In the organization of church affairs,
besides Zinzendorf and the Herrnhut missionaries, a prominent part
was taken by the pastor Dr. Melchior Mühlenberg (died 1787), a pupil
of A. H. Francke, and the Reformed pastor Schlatter from St. Gall;
the former sent by the Halle Orphanage, the latter by the Dutch
church. The Orphanage sent many earnest preachers till rationalism
broke in upon the society. As at the same time the stream of German
emigration was checked almost completely for several decades, and so
all intercourse with the mother country ceased, crowds of Germans,
impressed by the revivals, went over to the Anglo-American denominations,
and in the German denominations themselves along with
the English language entered also English Puritanism and Methodism.
In 1815 German emigration began again and grew from year to year.
At the synod of 1857 the Lutheran church with 3,000 pastors divided
into three main divisions: (1) The American Lutheran church had
become in language, customs, and doctrine thoroughly Anglicised and
Americanized; Zwinglian in its doctrine of the sacraments, it was
Lutheran in scarcely anything but the name, until in its chief
seminary at Gettysburg in Pennsylvania in 1850 a reaction set in in
favour of genuine Lutheran and German tendencies. (2) A greatly
attenuated Lutheranism with unionistic sympathies and frequent
abandonment of the German language also found expression in the
congregations of the Old Pennsylvanian Synod. (3) On the other
hand, the strict Lutheran church held tenaciously to the exclusive
use of the German language and the genuine Lutheran confession.
<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
The Prussian emigration with Grabau and the Saxon Lutheran settlers
with Stephan constituted its backbone (<ref target='Section_194_Para_1'>§ 194, 1</ref>). To them a number
of Bavarian Lutherans attached themselves who had emigrated under
the leadership of Löhe, whose missionary institute at Neuendettelsau
supplied them with pastors. The Saxon Lutherans were meanwhile
grouped together in the Missouri Synod, which Löhe's missionaries
also joined, so that it soon acquired much larger proportions than the
Buffalo Synod formed previously by the Prussian Lutherans under
Grabau. But very soon the two synods had a violent quarrel over
the idea of office and church which, owing to the reception by the
Missouri Synod of several parties excommunicated by the Buffalo
Synod, led to the formal breach of church fellowship between the two
parties. The Missouri Synod, with Dr. Walther at its head, attached
all importance to sound doctrine; the clerical office was regarded as
a transference of the right of the congregation and excommunication
as a congregational not a clerical act. The Buffalo Synod, on the
other hand, in consequence of serious conflict with pietistic elements,
had been driven into an overestimation of external order, of forms of
constitution and worship, and of the clerical office as of immediately
divine authority, and carried this to such a length as led to the dissolution
of the synod in 1877. Löhe's friends, who had not been able
to agree with either party, formed themselves into the Synod of Iowa,
with their seminary at Wartburg under Fritschel. On all questions
debated between the synods they took a mediating position. The
Missourians, however, would have nothing to do with them, while
those of Buffalo long maintained tolerably friendly relations with
them. But the historical view of the symbols taken by the Iowans,
their inclination toward the new development of Lutheran theology,
and above all their attitude toward biblical chiliasm, which they
wished to treat as an open question, seemed to those of Buffalo, as well
as to the Missourians, a falling away from the church confession, and
led to their excommunication by that party also.&mdash;In opposition to all
this splitting up into sections a General Council of the Lutheran
Church in America was held in 1866, which sought to combine all
Lutheran district synods, of which twelve, out of fifty-six, with 814
clergymen, joined it, Iowa assuming a friendly and Missouri a distinctly
hostile attitude. The ninth assembly at Galesburg in Illinois
in 1875 laid down as its fundamental principle, <q>Lutheran pulpits
only for Lutheran preachers, and Lutheran altars only for Lutheran
communicants.</q> The native Americans, however, insisted upon exceptions
being allowed, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> in peril of death, etc. On the question of
the limits of these exceptions, however, subsequent assemblies have
not been able to agree.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_208_Para_3'/>
3. But also in the Synodal Conference founded and led by the
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
Missouri Synod, embracing five synods, doctrinal controversies sprang
up in 1860. A large number with Dr. Walther at their head held
a strict doctrine of <emph>predestination</emph> which they regarded as the mark
of genuine Lutheranism. God has, they taught, chosen a definite
number of men from eternity to salvation; these shall and must be
saved. Salvation in Christ is indeed offered to all, but God secures it
only for His elect, so that they are sure of it and cannot lose it again,
not indeed <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>intuitu fidei</foreign> but only according to His sovereign grace.
Even one of the elect may seem temporarily to fall from grace, but he
cannot die without returning into full possession of it. Prof. Fritschel
protested against this in 1872 as essentially Calvinistic, and opposition
also arose in the Missouri Pastoral Conference. Prof. Asperheim, of
the seminary of the Norwegian Synod at Madison in Wisconsin, who
first pronounced against it in 1876, was deprived of his office and
obliged to withdraw from the synod. The controversy broke out in a
violent form at the conferences of about 500 pastors held at Chicago
in 1880 and at Milwaukee three months later in 1881, at the former of
which Prof. Stellhorn of Fort Wayne, at the latter Prof. Schmidt of
Madison, offered a vigorous opposition. Walther closed the conference
with the words: <q>You ask for war, war you shall have.</q> The result
was that the whole of the Ohio Synod and a large portion of the
Norwegian Wisconsin Synod, broke away from communion with the
Missouri Synod.&mdash;Walther and his adherents went so far in their
fanaticism as to pronounce not only their American opponents but all
the most distinguished Lutheran theologians of Germany, Philippi as
well as Hofmann, Luthardt as well as Kahnis, Vilmar as well as
Thomasius, Harms as well as Zöckler, etc., bastard theologians,
semipelagians, synergists and rationalists, and to refuse church
fellowship not only with all Lutheran national churches in Europe,
but also with German Lutheran Free Churches, which did not unconditionally
attach themselves to them. These Missouri separatist
communities, though everywhere quite unimportant, are in Europe
strongest in the kingdom of Saxony; they have also a few representatives
in Nassau, Baden, Württemberg, Bavaria and Hesse.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_208_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>German-Reformed and other German-Protestant Denominations.</emph>&mdash;The
German-Reformed church has its seminary at Mercersburg in Pennsylvania.
Its confession of faith is the Heidelberg Catechism, its
theology an offshoot of German evangelical union theology, but with
a distinctly positive tendency. Although the union theology there
prevailed among the Reformed as well as the Lutherans, a German
Evangelical Church Union was formed at St. Louis in 1841 which
wished to set aside the names Reformed and Lutheran. It established
a seminary at Marthasville in Missouri. The Herrnhuters are also
represented in America. Several German Methodist sects have recently
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
sprung up: 1. The <q>United Brethren in Christ,</q> with 500
preachers, founded by a Reformed preacher Otternbein (died 1813).
2. The <q>Evangelical Communion,</q> commonly called <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Albrechtsleute</foreign>,
founded by Jac. Albrecht, originally a Lutheran layman, whom his
own followers ordained in 1803, with 500 or 600 preachers working
zealously and carrying on mission work also in Germany (<ref target='Section_211_Para_1'>§ 211, 1</ref>).
3. The Weinbrennians or Church of God, founded by an excommunicated
Reformed pastor of that name in 1839. They carry the
Methodist revivalism to the most extravagant excess and are also
fanatical opponents of infant baptism.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_208_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>The Catholic Church.</emph>&mdash;A number of English Catholics under Lord
Baltimore settled in Maryland in 1634. The little community grew
and soon filled the land. There alone in the whole world did the
Roman Catholic church though dominant proclaim the principle of
toleration and religious equality. Consequently Protestants of various
denominations crowded thither, outnumbered the original settlers,
and rewarded those who had hospitably received them with abuse and
oppression. The Catholics were also treated in other states as idolaters
and excluded from public offices and posts of honour. Only after the
Declaration of Independence in 1783 was this changed by the sundering
of the connection of church and state and the proclamation of
absolute religious liberty. The number of Catholics was greatly increased
by numerous emigrations, specially from Ireland and Catholic
Germany. They now claim seven million members, with a cardinal
at New York, 13 archbishops, 64 bishops, about 7,000 churches and
chapels. A beautiful cathedral was erected in New York in 1879,
the immense cost of which, exceeding all expectation, was at last
defrayed by very unspiritual and unecclesiastical methods, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> lotteries,
fairs, dramatic exhibitions, concerts, and even dearly sold
kisses, etc. The Roman Catholics have also a university at St. Louis,
80 colleges, and 300 cloisters.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 209. The Roman Catholic States of South
America.</head>

<p>
To the predominantly Protestant North America the
position of the Roman Catholic states of South America
forms a very striking contrast. Nowhere else was the influence
and power of the clergy so wide-spread and deeply
rooted, nowhere else has the depravation of Catholicism
reached such a depth of superstition, obscurantism, and
fanaticism. During the second and third decades of our
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
century the Spanish states, favoured by the revolutionary
movement in the mother country, one after another asserted
their independence, and the Portuguese Brazil established
herself as an independent empire under the legitimate royal
prince of Portugal, Pedro I. in 1822. Although the other
new states adopted a republican constitution, they could
not throw aside the influence of the Catholic clergy and
carry out the principles of religious freedom proclaimed
in their constitutions. The Catholicism of the Creoles, half-castes,
and mulattoes was of too bigoted a kind and the
power of the clergy too great to allow any such thing.
Mexico went furthest in the attempt, and Brazil, under
Dom Pedro II. from 1831, astonished the world by the
vigorous measures of its government in 1874 against the
assumptions of the higher clergy.&mdash;In spite of all hindrances
a not inconsiderable number of small evangelical
congregations have been formed in Romish America, partly
through emigration and partly by evangelization.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_209_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Mexico.</emph>&mdash;Of all the American states, Mexico, since its independence
in 1823, has been most disturbed by revolutions and civil wars.
The rich and influential clergy, possessing nearly a half of all landed
property, was the factor with which all pretenders, presidents and
rulers had to reckon. After most of the earlier governments had
supported the clergy and been supported by them, the ultimately
victorious liberal party under president Juarez shook off the yoke
in 1859. He proclaimed absolute religious freedom, introduced civil
marriage, abolished cloisters, pronounced church possessions national
property and exiled the obstinate bishops. The clerical party now
sought and obtained foreign aid. Spain, France and England joined
in a common military convention in 1861 in supporting certain claims
of citizens repudiated by Juarez. Spain and England soon withdrew
their troops, and Napoleon III. openly declared the purpose of his
interference to be the strengthening of the Latin race and the
monarchical principle in America. At his instigation the Austrian
Grand-Duke Maximilian was elected emperor, and that prince, after
receiving the pope's blessing in Rome, began his reign in 1864. Distrusted
by all parties as a stranger, in difficulties with the curia and
clergy because he opposed their claims to have their most extravagant
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
privileges restored, shamefully left in the lurch by Napoleon from
fear of the threatening attitude of the North American Union, and
then sold and betrayed by his own general Bazaine, this noble but
unfortunate prince was at last sentenced by Juarez at a court-martial
to be shot in 1867. Juarez now maintained his position till the end
of his life in 1872, and strictly carried out his anticlerical reforms.
After his death clericalism again raised her head, and the Jesuits expelled
from Guatemala swarmed over the land. Yet constitutional
sanction was given to the Juarez legislation at the congress of 1873.
The Jesuits were driven across the frontiers, obstinate priests as well
as a great number of nuns, who had gathered again in cloisters and
received novices, were put in prison.&mdash;Also <emph>Evangelization</emph> advanced
slowly under sanction of law, though regarded with disfavour by the
people and interfered with often by the mob. It began in 1865 with
the awakening of a Catholic priest Francisco Aguilar and a Dominican
monk Manuel Aguas, through the reading of the Scriptures. They
laid the foundation of the <q><foreign lang='es' rend='italic'>Iglesia de Jesus</foreign></q> of converted Mexicans,
with evangelical doctrine and apostolic-episcopal constitution, which
has now 71 congregations throughout the whole country with about
10,000 souls. This movement received a new impulse in 1869, when a
Chilian-born Anglican episcopal minister of a Spanish-speaking congregation
in New York, called Riley, took the control of it and was
in 1879 consecrated its bishop. Besides this independent <q><emph>Church of
Jesus</emph></q> North American missionaries of various denominations have
wrought there since 1872 with slow but steady success.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_209_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>In the Republics of Central and Southern America</emph>, when the liberal
party obtained the helm of government through almost incessant
civil wars, religious freedom was generally proclaimed, civil marriage
introduced, the Jesuits expelled, cloisters shut up, etc. But in
<emph>Ecuador</emph>, president Moreno, aided by the clergy, concluded in 1862 a
concordat with the curia by which throughout the country only the
Catholic worship was tolerated, the bishops could condemn and confiscate
any book, education was under the Jesuits, and the government
undertook to employ the police in suppressing all errors and compelling
all citizens to fulfil all their religious duties. And further the
public resolved in 1873, although unable to pay the interest of the
national debt, to hand over a tenth of all state revenues to the pope.
But Moreno was murdered in 1875. The Jesuits, who were out of
favour, left Quito. The tithe hitherto paid to the pope was immediately
withheld, and in 1877 the concordat was abrogated. As
Ecuador in Moreno, so <emph>Peru</emph> at the same time in Pierola had a dictator
after the pope's own heart. The republic had his misgovernment
to thank for one defeat after another in the war with Chili.&mdash;<emph>Bolivia</emph>
in 1872 declared that the Roman Catholic religion alone
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
would be tolerated in the country, and suffered, in common with Peru,
annihilating defeats at the hand of Chili.&mdash;When at St. Iago in Chili,
during the festival of the Immaculate Conception in 1863, the Jesuit
church La Compania was burnt and in it more than 2,000 women and
children consumed, the clergy pronounced this disaster an act of grace
of the blessed Virgin, who wished to give the country a vast number
of saints and martyrs. But here, too, the conflicts between church
and state continued. In 1874 the Chilian episcopate pronounced the
ban against the president and the members of the national council
and of the Lower House who had favoured the introduction of a new
penal code which secured liberty of worship, but it remained quite
unheeded. When then the archiepiscopal chair of St. Iago became
vacant in 1878, the pope refused on any condition to confirm the
candidate appointed by the government. After the decisive victory
over Peru and Bolivia, the government again in December, 1881,
urgently insisted upon their presentation. The curia now sent to
Chili, avowedly to obtain more accurate information, an apostolic
delegate who took advantage of his position to stir up strife, so that
the government was obliged to insist upon his recall. As the curia
declined to do so, his passports were sent to the legate in January,
1883, and a presidential message was addressed to the next congress
which demanded the separation of the church and state, with the
introduction of civil marriage and register of civil station, as the only
remaining means for putting down the confusion caused by papal
tergiversation. The result of the long and heated debates that followed
was the promulgation of a law by which Catholicism was deprived of
the character of the state religion and the perfect equality
of all forms of worship was proclaimed.&mdash;<emph>Guatemala</emph> in 1872 expelled
the Jesuits whose power and wealth had become very great. In 1874
the president Borrias opened a new campaign against the clergy by
forbidding them to wear the clerical dress except when discharging
the duties of their office, and closing all the nunneries.&mdash;In <emph>Venezuela</emph>,
in 1872, Archbishop Guevara of Caracas, who had previously come
into collision with the government by favouring the rebels, forbade
his clergy taking part in the national festival, and put the cathedral
in which it was to be celebrated under the interdict. Deposed and
banished on this account, he continued from the British island of
Trinidad his endeavours to stir up a new rebellion. The president,
Guzman Blanco, after long fruitless negotiations with the papal nuncio,
submitted in May, 1876, to the congress at St. Domingo the draft of a
bill, which declared the national church wholly independent of Rome.
The congress not only homologated his proposals, but carried them further,
by abolishing the episcopal hierarchy and assigning its revenues
to the national exchequer, for education. Now at last the Roman curia
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
agreed to the deposition of Guevara and confirmed the nomination of
his previously appointed successor. But president Blanco now asked
congress to abolish the law, and this was agreed to.&mdash;In the United
States of <emph>Colombia</emph> since 1853, and in the <emph>Argentine Republic</emph> since 1865,
perfect liberty of faith and worship have been constitutionally secured.
From the latter state the Jesuits had been banished for a long
time but had managed to smuggle themselves in again. When in the
beginning of 1875 Archbishop Aneiros of Buenos Ayres addressed to
the government which favoured the clerical party rather than to the
congress which was the only competent court, a request to reinvest
the Jesuits with the churches, cloisters, and properties held by them
before their expulsion, a terrible outbreak took place, which the archbishop
intensified to the utmost by issuing a violent pastoral. A mob
of 30,000 men, convened by the students of the university, wrecked the
palace of the archbishop, then attacked the Jesuit college, burnt all
its furniture and ornaments on the streets and by means of petroleum
soon reduced the building itself to flames. Only with difficulty did
the military succeed in preventing further mischief. In October,
1884, the papal nuncio was expelled, because, when the government
decidedly refused his request to prevent the spread of Protestant
teaching and to place Sunday schools under the oversight of the
bishops, he replied in a most violent and passionate manner. About
the same time the republic of <emph>Costa-rica</emph> issued a law forbidding all
religious orders, pronouncing all vows invalid, and threatening banishment
against all who should contravene these enactments, and also
an education act which forbade all public instruction apart from
that provided by the State.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_209_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Brazil.</emph>&mdash;In Brazil down to 1884, the <q>Catholic Apostolic Roman
Religion</q> was, according to the constitution, the religion of the
empire. But from 1828 there was a Protestant congregation in Rio
de Janeiro, and through the inland districts, in consequence of immigration,
there were 100 small evangelical congregations, with twenty-five
ordained pastors, whose forms of worship were of various kinds.
In earlier times Protestant marriage was regarded as concubinage,
but in 1851 a law was passed which gave it civil recognition. But the
bishops held to their previous views and demanded of married converts
a repetition of the ceremony. Since 1870, however, the government
has energetically opposed the claims of the clergy who wished
only to acknowledge the authority of Rome. Protestant marriages
were pronounced equally legitimate with Catholic marriages, no civil
penalties are incurred by excommunication, all papal bulls are subject
to the approval of the government, and it was insisted that announcement
should be made of all clergy nominated. The clergy
considered freemasonry the chief source of all this liberal current,
<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>
and against it therefore they directed all their forces. The pope
assisted by his brief of May, 1873, condemning freemasonry. At the
head of the rebel prelates stood Don Vitalis Gonsalvez de Oliveira,
bishop of Olinda and Pernambuco. He published the papal brief
without asking the imperial permission, pronounced the ban upon all
freemasons and suspended the interdict over all associations which
refused to expel masonic brothers from their membership. In vain
the government demanded its withdrawal. It then accused him
of an attack upon the constitution. The supreme court ordered his
detention, and he was placed in the state prison at Rio de Janeiro in
January, 1874. The trial ended by his being sentenced to four years'
imprisonment, which the emperor as an act of grace commuted to detention
in a fortress, and set him free in a year and a half. In consequence
of this occurrence the Jesuits were, in 1874, expelled from the
country. The increasing advent of monks and nuns from Europe led
the government, in 1884, to appoint a commission to carry out the
law already passed in 1870, for the secularization of all monastic
property after providing pensions for those entitled to support. In
the same year all naturalized non-Catholics were pronounced eligible
for election to the imperial parliament and to the provincial assemblies.
The members belonging to the evangelical churches now number
about 50,000, of whom 30,000 are Germans.<note place='foot'>A full account of the recent development of Protestantism in
Brazil is given in an article in the <emph>Presbyterian Review</emph> for January,
1889, pp. 101-106, <q>The Organization of the Synod of Brazil,</q> by Dr.
J. Aspinwall Hodge.&mdash;On 15th November, 1889, the emperor was
expelled and a republic proclaimed.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>V. Opponents of Church and of Christianity.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 210. Sectarians and Enthusiasts in the Roman
Catholic and Orthodox Russian Domains.</head>

<p>
It cannot be denied that since the Tridentine attempt to
define the church doctrine far fewer sects condemning the
church as such have sprung from Roman Catholicism than
from Protestantism. Yet such phenomena are not wanting
in the nineteenth century. Their scarcity is abundantly
made up for by the numberless degenerations and errors
(<ref target='Section_191'>§ 191</ref>) which the Catholic church or its representatives in
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
the higher and lower grades of the clergy not only fell into,
but actually provoked and furthered, and thus encouraged
an unhealthy love for religious peculiarities. Were the
absence of new heretical, sectarian and fanatical developments
something to be gloried in for itself alone, the
Eastern church, with its absolute stability, would obtain this
distinction in a far higher degree. In the Russian church,
however, the multitude of sects which amid manifold oppressions
and persecutions continue to exist to the present
day, in spite of many persistent and even condemnable
errors, witnesses to a deep religious need in the Russian
people.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_210_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>Sects and Fanatics in the Roman Catholic Domain</emph> (<ref target='Section_187_Para_6'>§ 187, 6-8</ref>, <ref target='Section_190'>§ 190</ref>).&mdash;On
the Catholic Irvingites see <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>§ 211, 10</ref>.&mdash;(1) <emph>The Order of New Templars</emph>
sprang from the Freemasons (<ref target='Section_172_Para_2'>§ 172, 2</ref>). Soon after their establishment
in France the Jesuits sought to carry out their own hierarchical
ideas. The fable of an uninterrupted connection between
freemasonry as a <q>temple of humanity</q> and the Templars of the
Middle Ages, and the introduction therewith in their secret ceremonies
of exercises, borrowed from the chivalry of romance, afforded a means
toward this end. The idea was started in the Jesuit college at Claremont
and was approved and accepted by the local lodge. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1754
a great number of their noble members, who were disgusted with the
Jesuit templar farce, withdrew in order as <q>New Templars</q> to continue
the old order in the spirit of modern times. In consequence,
however, of the revolution that broke out in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1789 they could no
longer hold their ground as a band of nobles. Napoleon favoured the
reorganization of the order freed from those limits. The day of
Molay's death (§ 112, 7) was publicly celebrated with great pomp in
Paris, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1808 and the order spread among all French populations.
On the Bourbon restoration the grand-master was, at the instigation
of the Jesuits, cast into prison and the order suppressed. After the
July revolution he was liberated and a new temple was opened in
Paris in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1833. The show-loving Parisians for a long time took
pleasure in the peculiar rites and costume of the templars. When
this interest declined the order passed out of view. Its religion, which
professed to be a primitive revelation carried down in the Greek and
Egyptian mysteries, from which Moses borrowed, then further developed
by Christ and transmitted in esoteric tradition by John and
his successors the grand-masters of the templars, taught a divine
<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>
trinity of being, act and consciousness, the eternity of the world alongside
of God and an indwelling of God in man. It declared the Roman
Catholic church to be the only true Christianity (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>église chrétienne
primitive</foreign>). Its sacred book consisted of an apocryphal gospel of John
in accordance with its own notions.&mdash;(2) On the communistic society
of <emph>St. Simonians</emph>, which also sprang up in France, see <ref target='Section_212_Para_2'>§ 212, 2</ref>.&mdash;(3) St.
Simon's secretary was <emph>Aug. Comte</emph>, the founder of the Positivist philosophical
school (<ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>§ 174, 2</ref>) and he maintained intimate relations with
his master all through life. In his later years he undertook by carrying
his philosophical doctrine into the practical domain to sketch
out a <q>religion of humanity,</q> and thus became the founder of a
Positivist religious sect. The men of science indeed who had adopted
his philosophical principles (Littré, Renan, Taine, Lewes, Leslie
Stephens, Tyndall, Huxley, Draper, etc.), repudiate it; but in the
middle and lower ranks some were found longing for an object of
worship, who endeavoured on the basis of his <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Calendrier positiviste</foreign> and
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Catechisme positiviste</foreign> to form a religious society for the worship of
humanity. His festival calendar divides the year into thirteen months
of four weeks each, named after the thirteen great benefactors of mankind
(among whom Christ does not appear), while the weeks are named
after lesser heroes. By the profound veneration of woman, which
savours greatly of Mariolatry, as well as by the fantastic worship of
heroes, geniuses and scholars, which is a mimicry of the popish saint
worship, and by the adoption of a sacerdotalism like that of Catholicism,
this religion of humanity shows itself to be an antichristian
growth on Roman Catholic soil.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_210_Para_2'/>
2.&mdash;(4) <emph>Thomas Pöschl</emph>, in the second decade of the century, presents
an instance of a degeneration of originally pietistic tendencies into
mischievous fanaticism. A Catholic priest at Ampfelwang near Linz,
he sought under the influence of Sailer's mysticism to awaken in his
congregation a more lively Christianity by means of prayer meetings
and the circulation of tracts, in which he proclaimed the approaching
end of the world. When the district in which he lived was, in 1814,
attached to Austria, he was committed to prison, and his followers
accepted as their leader the peasant <emph>Jos. Haas</emph>, who led them further
still into fanatical excesses. His fanaticism at length went so far
that on Good Friday of 1817 a young maiden belonging to their party
suffered a voluntary death after the example of Christ for her brothers
and sisters. Pöschl professed the deepest horror at this cruel deed
for which he was blamed. He died in close monastic confinement in
1837.&mdash;(5) The Antinomian sect of the <emph>Antonians</emph>, most numerous in the
Canton Bern, had its beginning among the Roman Catholics. Its
founder was Antoni Unternährer, born and reared at Shüpfheim, near
Lucerne, in the Catholic faith. From 1802 he resided at Amfoldingen,
<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>
near Thun, where he stood in high repute among the peasants as a
quack doctor, gave himself out as the son of God a second time become
man, and proclaimed by word and writing the perfect redemption
from the curse of the law by the introduction of the true freedom of
the sons of God, which was to show itself first of all in the absolutely
unrestricted intercourse of the sexes. After two years' confinement
in a house of correction he was banished from the Canton Bern and
transported to his native place, where, abandoning all pastoral duties,
he died in a police cell in 1814. The sect, which had meanwhile
spread widely, and at Gsteig near Interlaken had obtained a new leader
in the person of Benedict Schori, a third incarnation of Christ, could
not be finally suppressed, notwithstanding the liberal use of the
prison, till the beginning of 1840. Even at this day scattered remnants
of Antonians are to be found in Canton Bern.&mdash;(6) When the
Austrian constitution of 1849 gave unconditional religious toleration,
the Bohemian <emph>Adamites</emph> (§ 115, 5), of whom remnants under the mask of
Catholicism had continued down to the nineteenth century, ventured
again publicly to engage in proselytising efforts. An official enquiry
instituted on this occasion declared that the sect, consisting of Bohemian
peasants and artisans, had its headquarters among the mystics
of the Krüdener school, that its religious doctrine was a mixture of
communism, freethinking and quietism, and that its members were in
their ordinary public life blameless, but that in their secret nightly
assemblies, where they dispensed with clothes, they celebrated orgies
regardless of marriage or relationship.&mdash;(7) <emph>David Lazzaretti</emph>, formerly
a carrier in Tuscany, appeared in his native place after an absence of
several years, in 1872, declaring that he was descended from a natural
son of Charlemagne and had been entrusted by the Apostle Peter with
a message to the pope, pointing to a cross that had been burnt upon
his brow by the apostle himself. He startled those of the Vatican,
where he was quite unknown, by declaring that the bones of his ancestors
lay under the ruins of an old Franciscan cloister in Sabina, of
whose existence nobody was aware, the discovery of which seemed to
vouch for his claims. These were all the more readily admitted when
it was found that he made the restoration of the Pope's temporal
power his main task. The number of his adherents, mostly peasants,
soon increased immensely, reaching, it is said, 40,000. On Monte
Labro they built a church with a strong <q>David's Tower,</q> over which
<q>St. David</q> appointed two priests who, when they had made certain
changes in worship at the call of the prophet, were excommunicated
by the bishop. David now began to spread his socialistic and communistic
ideas. He insisted that his adherents should surrender their
goods to him as representative of the society, and promised down to
December 31st, 1890, the introduction of community of goods throughout
<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>
Italy and afterwards in other countries. In Arcidosso, the prophet's
birthplace, a beginning was to be made, but in its overthrow
on August 18th, 1878, he met his death, and his befooled followers
waited in vain for the fulfilment of his dying promise that he would
rise again on the third day.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_210_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Russian Sects and Fanatics.</emph>&mdash;After the attempt under Nicholas I.
at the forcible conversion of the <emph>Raskolniks</emph>, especially the purely
schismatic <emph>Starowerzians</emph> or Old Believers (<ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>§ 163, 10</ref>), had proved fruitless,
the government of Alexander II. by patience and concession took
a surer way to reconciliation and restoration. In October, 1874, their
marriages, births and deaths, which had hitherto been without legal
recognition, were put on the regular register and so their lawful rights
of inheritance were secured. Under Alexander III. in 1883 an imperial
decree was issued, which gave them permission to celebrate
divine service after their own methods in their chapels, which had
not before the legal standing of churches, and declared them also
eligible for public appointments.&mdash;To the <emph>Duchoborzians</emph> (<ref target='Section_166_Para_2'>§ 166, 2</ref>),
sorely oppressed under Catherine II. and Paul I., Alexander I., after
they had laid before him the confession which they had adopted,
granted toleration, but assigned them a separate residence in the
Taurus district. Under Nicholas I. they were to the number of 3,000
transported to the Transcaucasian mountains in 1841, where they were
called Duchoborje.&mdash;The Württemberg Pietist colonists of South Russia
originated among the peasants the widespread sect of the <emph>Stundists</emph>
soon after the abolition of serfdom in 1863. The originator of those
separatist meetings for the study of Scripture, which led first of all to
the condemnation of image worship and making the sign of the cross
as unbiblical, and subsequently to a complete withdrawal from the
worship of the orthodox church and the forming of conventicles, was
the peasant and congregational elder Ratusny of Osnowa near Odessa,
to whom, at a later period, with equal propagandist zeal, the peasant
Balabok attached himself. The latter was, in 1871, sentenced to one
year's imprisonment at Kiev and the loss of civil rights, and in 1873, at
Odessa, a great criminal prosecution was instituted against Ratusny
and all the other leaders of the sect, which, however, after proceeding
for five years ended in a verdict of acquittal. A process started in
1878 against the so-called <emph>Schaloputs</emph> had a similar issue. This sect,
spread most widely among the Cossacks of Cuban, rejects the Old
Testament, the sacraments and the doctrine of the resurrection, but
believes in a continued effusion of the Holy Spirit upon the prophets
of the church who have prepared themselves for their vocation by
complete abstinence from flesh and spirituous liquor as well as by incessant
prayer and frequent fasting.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_210_Para_4'/>
4. About the middle of the eighteenth century among the <q><emph>Men of
<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>
God</emph>,</q> the strict interpretation of the prescriptions of their founder
Danila Filipow (<ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>§ 163, 10</ref>) had led many to abstain wholly from sexual
relations; when a peasant Andrew Selivanov appeared as a reformer
and founded the sect of the <emph>Skopzen</emph> or mutilators, who, building on
misinterpreted passages of Scripture (Matt. v. 28-30, xix. 12; Rev.
xiv. 4) insisted upon the destruction of sexual desire by castration and
excision of the female breasts, generally performed under anæsthetics,
as a necessary condition of entrance into the kingdom of heaven. The
first Skopzic congregation was gathered round him in the village of
Sosnowka. The <q>men of God</q> enraged at his success denounced him
to the government. He was punished with the knout and condemned
in 1774 to hard labour at Irkutzk. The idea that Peter III., who died
in 1762, was still alive, then widely prevailed. The <q>men of God</q> had
also adopted this opinion, and proclaimed him their last-appearing
Christ, who would soon return from his hiding-place to call to account
all unbelievers. Selivanov, who knew of this, now gave himself out
for the exiled monarch, and was accepted as such by his adherents
in his native place. When Paul I., Peter's son, assumed the reins of
government in 1796, a Skopzic merchant of Moscow told him secretly
that his father was living at Irkutzk under the name of Selivanov.
The emperor therefore brought him to Petersburg and shut him up as
an imbecile in an asylum. After Paul's death, however, his adherents
obtained his release. He now lived for eighteen years in honour at
Petersburg, till in 1820 the court again interfered and had him confined
in a cloister at Suzdal, where after some years he died. Sorely
persecuted by Nicholas I. many of his followers migrated to Moldavia
and Walachia where they, dwelling in separate quarters at Jassy,
Bucharest and Galatz, lived as owners of coach-hiring establishments,
and by rich presents obtained proselytes. Still more vigorously was
the propaganda carried on in the Moscow colonies on the Sea of Azov.
There in Morschansk lived the spiritual head of all Russian Skopzen,
the rich merchant Plotizyn. After the government got on the track
of this society, Plotizyn's house was searched and a correspondence
revealing the wide extension of the sect was found, together with a
treasure of several, some say as much as thirty, millions of roubles,
which, however, in great part again disappeared in a mysterious
manner. Plotizyn and his companions were banished to Siberia and
sentenced to hard labour, the less seriously implicated to correction in
a cloister.&mdash;The secret doctrine of the Skopzen so far as is known is as
follows: God had intended man to propagate not by sexual intercourse
but by a holy kiss. They broke this command and this constituted
the fall. In the fulness of time God sent his Son into the
world. The central point of his preaching transmitted to us in a
greatly distorted form was the introduction of the baptism of fire
<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>
(Matt. iii. 11), <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> mutilation by hot irons for which, in consideration
of human weakness, a baptism of castration may be substituted
(Matt. xix. 12). Origen is regarded by them as the greatest saint of
the ancient church; to his example all saints conformed who are represented
as beardless or with only a slight beard. The promised
return of the Christ (in this alone diverging from the doctrine of the
<q>men of God</q>), took place in the person of the emperor Peter III.
whom an unstained virgin bore, who was called the empress Elizabeth
Petrovna. The latter after some years transferred the government to
a lady of the court resembling her and retired into private life under
the name of Akulina Ivanovna, where she still remains invisible
behind golden walls, waiting for the things that are to come. Her
son Peter III., who had also himself undergone the baptism of fire,
escaped the snares of his wife, reappeared under the name of Selivanov,
performed many miracles and converted multitudes, obtained as a
reward the knout, and was at last sent to Siberia. Emperor Paul
recalled him and was converted by him. Under Alexander I. he was
again arrested and imprisoned in the cloister of Suzdal. But he was
conveyed thence by a divine miracle to Irkutzk, where he now lives in
secret, whence at his own time he shall return to judge the living and
the dead.&mdash;They kept up an outward connection with the state church
although they regarded it as the apocalyptic whore of Babylon. In
their own secret services inspired psalms were sung, and after exciting
dances prophecies were uttered.<note place='foot'>Hepworth Dixon, <q>Free Russia.</q> 2 vols. London, 1870. Heard,
<q>The Russian Church and Russian Dissent.</q> 2 vols. London, 1887.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_211'/>
<head>§ 211. Sectaries and Enthusiasts in the Protestant
Domain.</head>

<p>
The United States of America with their peculiar constitution
formed the favourite ground for the gathering and
moulding of sects during this age. There, besides the older
colonies of Quakers, Baptists and Methodists from England,
we meet with Swedenborgianism and Unitarianism, while
Baptists and Methodists began to send missionaries into
Europe, and from England the Salvation Army undertook
a campaign for the conquest of the world. But also on
the European continent independent fanatical developments
made their appearance.&mdash;A new combination of communism
<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>
with religious enthusiasm is represented by the Harmonists
and by the Perfectionists in North America. The Grusinian
Separatists and the Bavarian Chiliasts are millenarians of
German extraction, of whom the former sought deliverance
from the prevailing antichristian spirit in removal from, and
the latter in removal to, South Russia. The Amen churches
sought to gather God's people of the Jewish Christian communities
together in Palestine, while the so-called German
Temple sought to gather the Gentile Christians. As Latter
Day Saints, besides the Adventists, the Darbyites established
themselves on an independent basis; the Irvingites, with
revival of the apostolic offices and charisms, and their
American caricature, the Mormons, with the addition of
socialistic and fantastic gnostic tendencies. The religion of
the Taiping rebellion in China presented the rare phenomenon
of a national Chinese Christianity of native growth, and a
still rarer manifestation is met with in American-European
spiritualism with pretended spirit revelations from the other
world.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Methodist Propaganda.</emph>&mdash;From 1850 the American Methodists,
both the Albrechtsleute (<ref target='Section_208_Para_4'>§ 208, 4</ref>) and the Episcopal Methodists, have
sent out numerous missionaries, mostly Germans into Germany,
whose zeal has won considerable success among the country people.
In North-West Germany Bremen is their chief station, whence they
have spread to Sweden, Central and Southern Germany, and Switzerland,
and have stations in Frankfort, Carlsruhe, Heilbronn, and
Zürich.&mdash;Of a more evanescent character was the attempt made on
Germany by the so-called <emph>Oxford Holiness Movement</emph>. In 1866 the
North American Methodists celebrated their centenary in New York
by the appointment of a great revival and holiness committee, in
which were also members of many other denominations. Among
them the manufacturer, <emph>Pearsall Smith</emph>, of Philadelphia, converted in
1871, exhibited extraordinary zeal. In September, 1874, he held at
Oxford great revival meetings, from which the designation of the
Oxford movement had its origin. By some Germans there present
his opinions were carried to Germany. In spring, 1875, he began his
second European missionary tour. While his two companions, the
revivalists Moody and Sankey, travelled through England for the
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>
conversion of the masses, Smith went to Germany, and proceeding
from Berlin on to Switzerland, gave addresses in English, that were
interpreted, in ten of the large cities. The most pious among clergy
and laity flocked from far and near to hear him. The new apostle's
journey became more and more a triumphal march. He was lauded
as a reformer called to complete the work of Luther; as a prophet,
who was to fructify the barren wastes of Germany with the water of
life. The core of his doctrine was: Perfect holiness and the attainment
of absolute perfection, not hereafter, but now! now! now! with
the constant refrain: <q><emph>Jesus saves me now</emph></q>; not remission of sins
through justification by faith in the atoning efficacy of Christ's blood,
which only avails for outward sinful actions, but immediate extinction
of sins by Christ in us, proved in living, unfaltering, inner,
personal experience, etc. By a great international and interconfessional
meeting at Brighton, lasting for ten days, in June, 1875, at
which many German pastors, induced by the payment of travelling
expenses, were present, the crown was put upon the work. But at
the height of his triumph, under the daily increasing tension and
excitement the apostle of holiness showed himself to be a poor sinful
son of man, for he strayed into errors, <q>if not practically, at least
theoretically,</q> which his admirers at first referred to mental aberration,
but which they hid from the eyes of the world under a veil of
mystery. Toward the end of the Brighton conference he declared
to his hearers: <q>Thus plunge into a life of divine unconcern!</q> and,
<q>All Europe lies at my feet.</q> And in subsequent private conversations
he developed a system of ethics that <q>would suit Utah rather
than England,</q> to which he then so conformed his own conduct that
his admirers, <q>although satisfied of the purity of his own intentions,</q>
were obliged energetically to repudiate and with all speed send away
across the sea the man whom their own unmeasured adulation had
deceived.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>The Salvation Army.</emph>&mdash;An extremely fantastic caricature of English
Methodism is the <emph>Salvation Army</emph>. The Methodist evangelist,
<emph>William Booth</emph>, who in 1865 founded in one of the lowest quarters of
London a new mission station, fell upon the idea in 1878, in order
to make an impression on the rude masses, to give his male and female
helpers a military organisation, discipline and uniform, and with
military banners and music to undertake a campaign against the
kingdom of the devil. The General of the Salvationists is Booth
himself, his wife is his adjutant, his eldest daughter field-marshal;
his fellow-workers male and female are his soldiers, cadets and
officers of various ranks; chief of the staff is Booth's eldest son. Their
services are conducted according to military forms; their orchestra
of trombone, drum and trumpet is called the Hallelujah Brass Band.
<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>
Their journal, with an issue of 400,000, is the <emph>War Cry</emph>; another for
children, is <emph>The Little Soldier</emph>, in which Jane, four years old, dilates
on the experiences of her inner life; and Tommy, eleven years old, is
sure that, having served the devil for eleven years, he will now fight
for King Jesus; and Lucy, nine years old, rejoices in being washed
in the blood of the Lamb. The army attained its greatest success in
England. Its numerous <q>prisoners of war</q> from the devil's army
(prostitutes, drunkards, thieves, etc.) are led at the parade as trophies
of war, and tell of their conversion, whereupon the command of the
general, <q>Fire a Volley,</q> calls forth thousands of hallelujahs. Liberal
collections and unsought contributions, embracing several donations
of a £1,000 and more, are given to the General, not only to pay his
soldiers, but also to rent or to purchase and fit up theatres, concert
halls, circuses, etc., for their meetings, and to build large new
<q>barracks.</q> Its wonderful success has secured for the army many
admirers and patrons, even in the highest ranks of society. Queen
Victoria herself testified to Mrs. Booth her high satisfaction with her
noble work. At the Convocation, too, in the Upper as well as the
Lower House, distinguished prelates spoke favourably of its methods
and results, and so encouraged the formation of a Church Army,
which, under the direction of the mission preacher Aitken, pursues
similar ways to those of the Salvation Army, without, however, its
spectacular displays, and has lately extended its exertions to India.
The temperance party after the same model has formed a Blue Ribbon
Army, the members of which, distinguished by wearing a piece of
blue ribbon in the buttonhole, confine themselves to fighting against
alcohol. In opposition to it public-house keepers and their associates
formed a Yellow Ribbon Army, which has as its ensign the yellow
silk bands of cigar bundles. Soon after the first great success of the
Salvation Army, a Skeleton Army was formed out of the lowest dregs
of the London mob, which, with a banner bearing the device of a
skeleton, making a noise with all conceivable instruments, and singing
obscene street songs to sacred melodies, interrupted the marches of
the Salvation, and afterwards of the Church, Army: throwing stones,
filthy rotten apples and eggs, and even storming and demolishing
their <q>barracks.</q>&mdash;In 1880 a detachment of the Salvation Army, with
Railton at its head, assisted by seven Hallelujah Lasses, made a first
campaign in America, with New York as its head-quarters. In the
following year, under Miss Booth, it invaded France, where it issues
a daily bulletin, <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>En Avant</foreign>.</q> In 1882 it appeared in Australia, then
in India, where Chunder Sen, the founder of the Brama-Somaj, showed
himself favourable. In Switzerland it broke ground in 1882, in
Sweden in 1884, and in Germany, at Stuttgart, in November, 1886.
Africa, Spain, Italy, etc., followed in succession. These foreign corps
<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>
outside of England also found considerable success. Almost everywhere
they met with opposition, the magistrates often forbidding
their meetings, and inflicting fines and imprisonment, and the mob
resorting to all sorts of violent interference. Nowhere were both
sorts of opponents so persistent as in Switzerland in 1883 and 1884,
especially in Lausanne, Geneva, Neuenburg, Bern, Beil, etc. Although
General Booth himself at the annual meeting in April, 1884, boasted
that £393,000 had been collected during the past year for the purposes
of the army, and over 846 barracks in eighteen countries of the world
had been opened, and now even spoke of strengthening the army by
establishing a Salvation Navy, the increasing extravagances caused
by the army itself, as well as the far greater improprieties of those
more or less associated with it, has drawn away many of its former
supporters.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Baptists and Quakers.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Baptist</emph> sympathies and tendencies often
appeared in Germany apart from an anti-ecclesiastical pietism or
mysticism. But this aberration first assumed considerable proportions
when a Hamburg merchant, Oncken, who had been convinced by his
private Bible reading of the untenableness of infant baptism, was
baptized by an American baptist in 1834, and now not only founded
the first German baptist congregation in Hamburg, but also proved
unwearied in his efforts to extend the sect over all Germany and
Scandinavia by missions and tract distribution. Oncken died in 1884.
Thus gradually there were formed about a hundred new Baptist
German congregations in Mecklenburg, Brandenburg (Berlin),
Pomerania, Silesia, East Prussia (Memel, Tilsit, etc.), Westphalia,
Wupperthal, Hesse, Württemberg and Switzerland. In Sweden
(250 congregations with 18,000 souls) they were mainly recruited
from the <q>Readers,</q> who after 1850 went over in crowds (<ref target='Section_201_Para_2'>§ 201, 2</ref>).
They also found entrance into Denmark and Courland, but in all
cases almost exclusively among the uncultured classes of labourers
and peasants. After long but vain attempts at suppression by the
governments during the reactionary period of 1850, they obtained
under the liberal policy of the next two decades more or less religious
toleration in most states. They called themselves the society of
<q>baptized Christians,</q> and maintained that they were <q>the visible
church of the saints,</q> the chosen people of God, in contrast to the
<q>hereditary church and the church of all and sundry,</q> in which they
saw the apocalyptic Babylon. Even the Mennonites who <q>sprinkle,</q>
instead of immersing, <q>all,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> without proper sifting, they regard
as a <q>hereditary</q> church. With the Anglo-American Baptists they
do indeed hold fellowship, but take exception to them in several points,
especially about open communion.&mdash;A peculiar order of Baptists has
arisen in Hungary in the <emph>Nazarenes</emph> or Nazirites, or as they call themselves:
<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>
<q>Followers of Christ.</q> Founded in 1840 by Louis Henefey
originally a Catholic smith, who had returned home from Switzerland,
the sect obtained numerous adherents from all three churches, most
largely from the Reformed church, favoured perhaps by the not yet
altogether extinguished reminiscences of the Baptist persecutions of
the eighteenth century (<ref target='Section_163_Para_2'>§ 163, 2</ref>). They practised strict asceticism,
refused to take oaths or engage in military service, and kept the bare
Puritan forms of worship, in which any one was allowed to preach
whom the Holy Spirit enlightened. Their congregations embraced
weak and strong friends, and also weak and strong brethren. The
strong friends after receiving baptism joined the ranks of weak
brethren, and then again became strong brethren on their admission
to the Lord's Supper. The church officers were singers, teachers,
evangelists, elders, and bishops.&mdash;In North America <emph>Quakerism</emph>, under
the influence of increasing material prosperity, had lost much of its
primitive strictness in life and manners. The more lax were styled
<emph>Wet-</emph>, and their more rigorous opponents <emph>Dry-Quakers</emph>. Enthusiasm
over the American War of Independence of 1776-1783, spreading in
their ranks, led to further departures from the rigid standard of
early times. Those who took weapons in their hands were designated
<emph>Fighting Quakers</emph>. The General Assembly disapproved but tolerated
these departures; neither the Wet nor the Fighting Quakers were
excommunicated, but they were not allowed any part in the government
of the community. In 1822 a party appeared among them, led
by Elias Hicks, which carried the original tendency of Quakerism to
separate itself from historical Christianity so far as to deny the
divinity of Christ, and to allow no controlling authority to Scripture
in favour of the unrestricted sway of reason and conscience. This
departure from the traditions of Quakerism, however, met with
vigorous opposition, and the protesting party, known as <emph>Evangelical
Friends</emph>, pronounced more decidedly than ever for the authority of
Scripture. In England, notwithstanding the wealth and position of
its adherents, Quakerism, since the second half of the eighteenth century,
has suffered a slow but steady decrease, while even in America,
to say the least, no advance can be claimed. In Holland, Friesland,
and Holstein, Quaker missionaries had found some success among the
Mennonites, without, however, forming any separate communities.
In 1786 some English Quakers succeeded in winning a small number
of proselytes in Hesse, who in 1792, under the protection of the prince
of Waldeck, formed a little congregation at Friedersthal, near Pyrmont,
which still maintains its existence.&mdash;On the sects of Jumpers
and Shakers, variously related to primitive, fanatical Quakerism, see
<ref target='Section_170_Para_7'>§ 170, 7</ref>.<note place='foot'>Rowntree, <q>Quakerism Past and Present.</q> London, 1859.</note>
</p>

<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>Swedenborgians and Unitarians.</emph>&mdash;In the nineteenth century <emph>Swedenborgianism</emph>
has found many adherents. In England, Scotland and
North America the sect has founded many missionary and tract
societies. In Württemberg the procurator Hofacker and the librarian
Tafel, partly by editions and translations of the writings of
Swedenborg, partly by their own writings, were specially zealous in
vindicating and spreading their views. A general conference of all
the congregations in Great Britain and Ireland in 1828 published a
confession of faith and catechism, and thirteen journals (three English,
seven American, Tafel's in German, one Italian and one Swedish)
represent the interests of the party. The liberal spirit of modern
times has in various directions introduced modifications in its doctrine.
Its Sabellian opposition to the church doctrine of the Trinity
and its Pelagian opposition to the doctrine of justification, have been
retained, and its spiritualising of eschatological ideas has been intensified,
but the theosophical magical elements have been wholly set
aside and scarcely any reference is ever made to revelations from the
other world.&mdash;From early times the <emph>Unitarians</emph> had a well ordered and
highly favoured ecclesiastical institution in Transylvania (<ref target='Section_163_Para_1'>§ 163, 1</ref>).
But in England the law still threatened them with a death sentence.
This law had not indeed for a long time been carried into effect, and
in 1813 it was formally abrogated. There are now in England about
400 small Unitarian congregations with some 300,000 souls. The
famous chemist Jos. Priestly may be regarded as the founder of North
American Unitarianism (<ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>§ 171, 1</ref>), although only after his death in
1804 did the movement which he represented spread widely through
the country. Then in a short time hundreds of Unitarian congregations
were formed. Their most celebrated leaders were W. Ellery
Channing, who died in 1842, and Theodore Parker, who died in 1860,
both of Boston.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>Extravagantly Fanatical Manifestations.</emph>&mdash;The English woman
Johanna Southcote declared that she was the <q>woman in the sun</q>
of Revelation xii. or the Lamb's wife. In 1801 she came forth with
her prophecies. Her followers, the <emph>New Israelites</emph> or Sabbatarians, so
called because they observed the Old Testament law of the Sabbath,
founded a chapel in London for their worship. A beautiful cradle long
stood ready to receive the promised Messiah, but Johanna died in 1814
without giving birth to him.&mdash;A horrible occurrence, similar to that
recorded in <ref target='Section_210_Para_2'>§ 210, 2</ref>, took place some years later, in 1823, in the village
of Wildenspuch in Canton Zürich. <emph>Margaret Peter</emph>, a peasant's
daughter, excited by morbid visions in early youth, was on this
account expelled from Canton Aargau, and was carried still farther in
the direction of extreme mysticism by the vicar John Ganz, by whom
she was introduced to Madame de Krüdener (<ref target='Section_176_Para_2'>§ 176, 2</ref>). Amid continual
<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
heavenly visions and revelations, as well as violent conflicts with
the devil and his evil spirits, she gathered a group of faithful followers,
by whom she was revered as a highly gifted saint, among them a
melancholy shoemaker, Morf, whom Ganz introduced to her. The
spiritual love relationship between the two in an unguarded hour took
a sensual form and led to the birth of a child, which Morf's forbearing
wife after successfully simulating pregnancy adopted as her own. This
deep fall, for which she wholly blamed the devil, drove her fanaticism
to madness. The ridiculous proceedings in her own house, where for
a whole day she and her adherents beat with fists and hammers what
they supposed to be the devil, led the police to interfere. But before
orders arrived from Zürich, she found refuge in an asylum, and there
the end soon came. Margaret assured her followers that in order that
Christ might fully triumph and Satan be overthrown, blood must be
shed for the salvation of many thousand souls. Her younger sister
Elizabeth voluntarily allowed herself to be slain, and she herself with
almost incredible courage allowed her hands and feet to be nailed to
the wood and then with a stroke of the knife was killed, under the
promise that she as well as her sister should rise again on the third
day. The tragedy ended by the apprehension and long confinement
of those concerned in it.&mdash;The sect of <emph>Springers</emph> in Ingermannland had
its origin in 1813. Arising out of a religious excitement not countenanced
by the church authorities, they held that each individual
needed immediate illumination of the Holy Spirit for his soul's salvation.
So soon as they believed that this was obtained, the presence of
the Spirit was witnessed to by ecstatic prayer, singing and shouting
joined with handshaking and springing in their assemblies. The
special illumination required as its correlate a special sanctification,
and this they sought not only in repudiation of marriage, but also in
abstinence from flesh, beer, spirits and tobacco. The <q>holy love,</q>
prized instead of marriage, however, here also led to sensual errors,
and the result was that many after the example of the Skopzen (<ref target='Section_210_Para_4'>§ 210,
4</ref>) resorted to the surer means of castration.&mdash;Among the Swedish
peasants in 1842 appeared the singular phenomenon of the <emph>Crying
Voices</emph> (<foreign lang='sv' rend='italic'>Röstar</foreign>). Uneducated laymen, and more particularly women
and even children, after convulsive fits broke out into deep mutterings
of repentance and prophesyings of approaching judgment. The
substance of their proclamations, however, was not opposed to the
church doctrine, and the criers were themselves the most diligent
frequenters of church and sacrament.&mdash;In the beginning of 1870 the
wife of a settler at Leonerhofe, near San Leopoldo in Brazil, <emph>Jacobina
Maurer</emph>, became famous among the careless colonists of that region as
a pious miracle-working prophetess. In religious assemblies which
she originated, she gave forth her fantastic revelations based upon
<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>
allegorical interpretations of Scripture, and founded a congregation
of the <q>elect</q> with a communistic constitution, in which she assumed
to herself all church offices as the Christ come again. Rude abuse
and maltreatment of these <q>Muckers</q> on the part of the <q>unbelieving,</q>
and the interference of the police, who arrested some of the
more zealous partisans of the female Christ, brought the fanaticism
to its utmost pitch. Jacobina now declared it the duty of believers
to prepare for the bliss of the millennium by rooting out all the godless.
Isolated murders were the prelude of the night of horror, June
25th-26th, 1874, on which well organized Mucker-bands, abundantly
furnished with powder and shot, went forth murdering and burning
through the district for miles around. The military sent out against
them did not succeed in putting down the revolt before August 2nd,
after the prophetess with many of her adherents had fallen in a fanatically
brave resistance.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Christian Communistic Sects.</emph>&mdash;The only soil upon which these
could flourish was that of the Free States of North America. Besides
the small Shaker communities (<ref target='Section_170_Para_7'>§ 170, 7</ref>) still surviving in 1858, the
following new fraternities are the most important: 1. The <emph>Harmonites</emph>.
The dissatisfaction caused among the Württemberg Pietists by the
introduction of liturgical innovations led to several migrations in the
beginning of the century. Geo. Rapp, a simple peasant from the
village of Iptingen, went to America in 1803 or 1804 with about six
hundred adherents, and settled in the valley of Connoquenessing, near
Pittsburg in Pennsylvania. As a fundamental principle of this
<q>Harmony Association,</q> which honoured father Rapp as autocratic
patriarch, prophet and high priest, and with him believed in the near
approach of the second advent, the community of goods holds a prominent
place. By diligence and industry in agriculture, labour and
manufactures, they reached great prosperity under the able leadership
of their patriarch. In 1807 the community, by a resolution of its
own to which Rapp agreed, resolved to abstain from marriage, so that
henceforth no children were born nor marriages performed. A falling
off in numbers was made up in 1817 by new arrivals from Württemberg
and afterwards by the adoption of children. Industrial reasons
led the community in 1814 to colonize Wabashthal in Indiana, where
they built the town of Harmony, which, however, in 1823, on account
of its unhealthy situation, they sold to the Scotchman Robert Owen
(<ref target='Section_212_Para_3'>§ 212, 3</ref>), and then founded for themselves the town of Economy, not
far from Pittsburg, where they still reside. In 1831 an adventurer,
Bernard Müller, appeared among them, who, at Offenbach, had, for a
long time, under the name of Proli, played a brilliant part as a prophet
called to establish universal spiritual monarchy, and then, when in
danger from the courts of law, had fled to America. In Economy,
<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>
where he passed himself off as Count Maximilian von Leon, persecuted
on account of his belief in the second coming, he found as such a
hearty welcome, and within a year, by his agitation for the reintroduction
of marriage and worldly enjoyments, drew away a third part
of the community, embracing 250 souls. The dissentients with
105,000 dollars from the common purse withdrew and settled under
the leadership of the pseudo-count as a New Jerusalem society in the
neighbouring village of Philippsburg. But the new patriarch conducted
himself so riotously that he was obliged in 1833 to flee to
Louisiana, where in the same year he died of cholera. His people
now in deep distress turned to Dr. Keil, a mystic come from Prussia,
who reorganised them after the pattern of Rapp's communistic
society, but with liberty to marry, and brought them to a prosperous
condition in two colonies mainly founded by him at Bethel in
Missouri and Aurora in Oregon. Economy, too, flourished in spite
of the heavy losses it sustained, so that now the common property
of the populace, which through celibacy had been reduced to about
eighty persons, amounts to eight million dollars. Father Rapp died
in 1847, in his ninetieth year, confident to the end that he would
guide his church unto the hourly expected advent of Christ.&mdash;2.
When in 1831 a wave of revival passed over North America, J. H.
Noyes, an advocate's assistant, applied himself to the study of the
Bible and became the founder of a new sect, the <emph>Bible Communists</emph> or
<emph>Perfectionists</emph> of the Oneida Society. He taught that the promised
advent of Christ took place spiritually soon after the destruction of
Jerusalem; by it the kingdom of Adam was ended and the kingdom
of God in the heart of those who knew and received him was established.
The official churches were only state churches, but the true
church was scattered in the hearts of individual saints, until Noyes
collected and organized it into a Bible family. For them there is no
more law, for laws are for sinners and the saints no longer sin. Each
saint can do and suffer whatever the Spirit of God moves him to. All
the members of the congregation constitute one family, live, eat, and
work together. Goods, wives and children are in common. It lies with
the wife to accept or refuse the approaches of a man. But soon this
proclaimed freedom from law sent everything into confusion and disunion;
schism&mdash;apostasy prevailed. But Father Noyes now saved his
church from destruction by introducing a correction to this freedom
from law in <emph>Sympathy</emph>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> in the agreement of all members of the family.
The odium which fell upon the community from without on account
of its <q>complex marriages,</q> induced him at last in August, 1879,
although he still always maintained the soundness of his principle of
free love and its final victory over prejudice, to ordain the introduction
of monogamic marriages, and the community acquiesced. With
<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>
regard to community of goods, meals and children, however, they kept
to the old lines. The parent community has its seat at Lenox in
Oneidabach in New York State. Alongside of it are three daughter
communities. They have their prophets and prophetesses, but no
ritual service and no Sunday. Their employment (they number
about 300 souls) is mainly fruit culture and the manufacture of snares
of every kind for wild and other animals.<note place='foot'>Dixon, <q>New America.</q> 2 vols., 8th edition. London, 1869.
Nordhoff, <q>The Communistic Societies of the United States.</q> London,
1874.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_7'/>
7. <emph>Millenarian Exodus Communities.</emph>&mdash;1. The <emph>Georgian Separatists</emph>. The
stream of Württemberg emigrants above referred to turned also
toward Southern Russia. The settlers in Transcaucasian Georgia in
the long absence of regular pastors fell into fanatical separation, which
the clergy who followed in 1820 could not overcome. Under the
direction of three elders (one of them an old woman) as representing
the Holy Trinity, they lived quietly, refused to baptize their children,
to give their dead burial according to the rites of the church,
to call in physicians in sickness, and at last rejected the marriage
relation. In 1842 their female elder, Barbara Spohn, wife of a cartwright,
appeared in the rôle of a prophet, proclaiming the near approach
of the end of the world and calling upon her followers to pass
through the wilderness to the promised land, there to enter into the
millenial kingdom. They were to take with them no money, no bread,
etc., but only a staff; their clothes and shoes would not wear old in
the desert, they could eat manna and quails, and in the holy land
Christ would dress them in the bridal robe. The government sought
in vain to bring them to reason and to obstruct their way, when about
three hundred of them wished at Pentecost, 1843, to start on their
journey. They were allowed to send three men to Constantinople and
Palestine to seek permission from the Turkish government to settle
in a spot near Jerusalem. But these returned before the close of the
year with the news, that Palestine is not the land that would suit
them. This brought the majority to their senses and they rejoined
the church.&mdash;2. Equally unfortunate was the attempt at colonization
made in 1878 by some <emph>Bavarian Chiliasts</emph>. The pastor Clöter in
Illenschwang had for a long time in the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Brüderbote</foreign>,</q> edited by him,
urged the emigration of believers to South Russia, where, according to
his exposition of the apocalyptic prophecy, a secure place of refuge
had been provided by God for believers of the last times during the
near approaching persecutions of antichrist. In June, 1878, the tailor
Minderlein with his family and nineteen other persons started to go
<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>
thither. Minderlein died by the way, and his companions after enduring
great hardships were obliged to return, and reached Nuremberg
again in October, absolutely destitute. Clöter, however, was not
discouraged by this misfortune. In December he called his adherents
from Bavaria, Württemberg and Switzerland, together to a
conference at Stuttgart, where they formed themselves into the <q><emph>German
Exodus Church</emph>.</q> In the summer, 1880, Clöter himself travelled to
South Russia and thought that he found in the Crimea the fittest
place of refuge. On his return he was banished, but after some days
liberated, though deprived of his clerical office. A final stop was
then put to the exodus movement.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_8'/>
8.&mdash;3. The <emph>Amen Community</emph> owed its feeble existence to a Christian
Jew, Israel Pick of Bohemia. Believing that he was not required in
baptism to renounce his Judaism, but that rather thereby he first
became a true Jew, through a onesided interpretation of Old Testament
promises to his nation, he wished to found a colony of the people of
God in the Holy Land on Jewish-Christian principles. The whole
Mosaic law, excluding the observance of the Sabbath and circumcision,
was to be the basis, together with baptism and the Lord's Supper, of
ecclesiastical and civil organization. He succeeded in winning a few
converts here and there, to whom he gave the name of the Amen
Community, because in Christ (the אלהי אמן Isa. lxv. 16) all the
prophecies of the old covenant are Yea and Amen. Its chief seat was
at Munich-Gladbach. In 1859 Pick travelled to Palestine in order to
choose a spot for the settlement of his followers and there all trace
of him was lost.&mdash;4. The founder of the <emph>German Temple Communities</emph> in
Palestine was Chr. Hoffmann, brother of General Superintendent
Hoffmann of Berlin, and son of the founder of the Kornthal Community
(<ref target='Section_196_Para_5'>§ 196, 5</ref>), in connection with Chr. Paulus, nephew of the well
known Heidelberg professor Paulus (<ref target='Section_182_Para_2'>§ 182, 2</ref>). In 1854 they issued
an invitation to a conference at Ludwigsburg, for consultation about
the means for gathering the people of God in Palestine. A great
crowd of believers from all parts, numbering some 10,000 families,
was to embark for the holy land to form there a new people of God
which, on the foundation of prophets and apostles, should strictly
practise the public law of the old covenant in all points of civil
administration, including the laws of the sabbath and the jubilee.
The conference besought of the German League that it would use its
influence with the Sultan to secure permission for colonization with
self-government and religious freedom. As the German League
simply declined the request, the committee bought the estate of
Kirschenhardthof near Marbach, in order there temporarily and in a
small way to form a social commonwealth observing the Mosaic law.
In 1858 Hoffmann went with two of his followers to Jerusalem in
<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>
order to look out a place there suitable for their purpose. The result
was unsatisfactory. Therefore he issued in 1861 a summons to take
part in a German Temple. Consequently a number of men from
Württemberg, Bavaria, and Baden, Protestants and Catholics, forsook
their churches, ordained priests and elders, and appointed Hoffmann
their bishop and held regular synods. The final aim of this
procedure, however, was always still to find a settlement in Palestine
and erect a temple in Jerusalem which, according to prophecy, is to
form the central sanctuary for the whole world. Colonization in the
East was tried as a means to this end. Since 1869 there have been
five organized colonies, with a Temple Chief and a congregational
school, embracing about 1,000 souls, established in Palestine, <hi rend='italic'>viz.</hi> at
Jaffa, Haifa, Sarona, Beyrout, and in 1878 even in Jerusalem, whither
the original colony at Jaffa was transferred. The German Imperial
Government refused indeed in 1879 to give the recognition sought for
to the civil and political organization of the Palestinian colonies, as in
a foreign country beyond its jurisdiction, but granted to its Lyceum
at Jerusalem a yearly contribution of 1,500 marks and to the schools
of Jaffa, Haifa and Sarona from 650 to 1,000. In 1875 Hoffmann published
at Stuttgart a large apologetical and polemical work, <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Occident
und Orient</foreign>,</q> which contained many thoughtful remarks. But since
then, in the central organ of all the Temple Communities inspired by
him, the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Süddeutsche Warte</foreign>,</q> he has openly and distinctly attached
himself to Ebionitic rationalism, by denying and opposing the fundamental
evangelical doctrine of the trinity, redemption, and the
sacraments. These theological views, however, were by no means
shared in by all the Templars, and caused a split in the community,
one section at Haifa with the chief templar there, Hardegg, at its
head, separating from the central body as an independent <q>Imperial
Brotherhood.</q> The seceders, joined by many German and American
templar friends, again drew nearer to the Evangelical church and
ultimately became reconciled with it. But Hoffmann has, in his last
work, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bibelforschungen</foreign> i. ii.: <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Röm.- u. Kol. br., Jerus.</foreign> 1882, 1884,
carried his polemic against the church doctrine to the utmost extreme
of cynical abuse. He died in December, 1885. At the head of the
denomination now stands his fellow-worker Paulus. From year to
year several drop back into the Evangelical church so that the community
is evidently approaching extinction.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_9'/>
9. <emph>The Community of <q>the New Israel.</q></emph>&mdash;The Jewish advocate Jos.
Rabinowitsch at Kishenev in Bessarabia, who had long occupied
himself with plans for the improvement of the spiritual and material
circumstances of his fellow-countrymen, at the outbreak of the persecution
of the Jews in 1882 in South Russia eagerly urged their
return to the holy land of their fathers and himself undertook a
<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
journey of inspection. There definite shape seems to have been given
to the long cherished thought of seeking the salvation of his people
in an independent national attachment to their old sacred historical
development, broken off 1850 years before, by acknowledging the
Messiahship of Jesus. At least after his return he gave expression
to the sentiment, based on Romans xi.: <q>The keys of the holy land
are in the hands of our brother Jesus,</q> which, in consequence of the
high esteem in which he was held by his countrymen, was soon re-echoed
by some 200 Jewish families. His main endeavour now was
the formation of independent national Jewish-Christian communities,
after the pattern of the primitive church of Jerusalem, as <q><emph>New
Israelites</emph>,</q> observing all the old Jewish rites and ordinances compatible
with New Testament apostolic preaching and reconcilable
with modern civil and social conditions. The Torah, the prophets of
the Old Testament and the New Testament writings, are held as absolutely
binding, whereas the Talmud and the post-apostolic Gentile
Christian additions to doctrine, worship, and constitution are not so
regarded. Jesus, Rabinowitsch teaches, is the true Messiah who, as
Moses and prophets foretold, was born as Son of David by the Spirit
of God and in the power of that Spirit lived and taught in Israel,
then for our salvation suffered, was crucified and died, rose from the
dead, and ascended to the right hand of the Father in heaven. The
trinity of persons in God as well as the two natures in Christ he
rejects, as not taught in the New Testament and originating in Gentile
Christian speculation. Baptism and the Lord's Supper (and that
<q>according to the example of Christians of the pure Evangelical
confession in England and Germany</q>) are recognised as necessary
means of grace; but the Lord's Supper is to be, according to its institution,
a real meal with the old Jewish prayers. As to the doctrine
of the Supper, Rabinowitsch agrees with the views of the Lutheran
church. Circumcision and the observance of the Sabbath and the
feasts (especially the Passover), are retained, not indeed as necessary
to salvation, therefore not binding on Gentile Christians, but patriotically
observed by Jewish-Christians as signs of their election
from and before all nations as the people of God. In January, 1885,
with consent of the Russian Government, the newly-erected synagogue
of <q>the holy Messiah Jesus Christ</q> for the small congregation of
Rabinowitsch's followers at Kishenev was solemnly opened, the
Russian church authorities, the Lutheran pastor Fultin and many
young Jews taking part in the service. Soon afterwards Rabinowitsch
received Christian baptism in the chapel of the Bohemian
church at Berlin at the hands of Prof. Mead of Andover, probably in
recognition of the aid sent from America.&mdash;A Jewish-Christian religious
communion with similar tendencies has been formed in the
<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>
South Russian town of Jellisawetgrad under the designation of a
<q><emph>Biblical Spiritual Brotherhood</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_10'/>
10. <emph>The Catholic Apostolic Church of the Irvingites.</emph>&mdash;Edward Irving,
1792-1834, a powerful and popular preacher of the Scotch-Presbyterian
church in London, maintained the doctrine that the human nature
of Christ like our own was affected by original sin, which was overcome
and atoned for by the power of the divine nature. At the same
time he became convinced that the spiritual gifts of the apostolic
church could and should still be obtained by prayer and faith. A
party of his followers soon began to exercise the gift of tongues by
uttering unintelligible sounds, loud cries, and prophecies. His presbytery
suspended him in 1832 and the General Assembly of the Church
of Scotland excommunicated him. Rich and distinguished friends
from the Episcopal church, among them the wealthy banker, Drummond,
afterwards prominent as an apostle (died 1859), rallied round
the man thus expelled from his church, and gave him the means to
found a new church, but, in spite of Irving's protests, brought with
them high church puseyite tendencies, which soon drove out the heretical
as well as the puritanic tendencies, and modified the fanatical
element into a hierarchical and liturgical formalism. The restoration
of the office of apostle was the characteristic feature of the movement.
After many unsuccessful attempts they succeeded by the divine
illumination of the prophets in calling twelve apostles, first and chief
of whom was the lawyer Cardale (died 1877). By the apostles, as chief
rulers and stewards of the church, evangelists and pastors (or angels,
Rev. ii. 1, 8, etc.) were ordained in accordance with Eph. iv. 11; and
subordinate to the pastors, there were appointed six elders and as
many deacons, so that the office bearers of each congregation embraced
thirteen persons, after the example of Christ and His twelve disciples.
In London seven congregations were formed after the pattern of the
seven apocalyptic churches (Rev. i. 20). Prominent among their new
revelations was the promise of the immediately approaching advent
of the Lord. The Lord, who was to have come in the lifetime of the
first disciples and so was looked for confidently by them, delayed
indefinitely His return on account of abounding iniquity and prevented
the full development of the second apostolate designed for the
Gentiles and meanwhile represented only by Paul, because the church
was no longer worthy of it. Now at last, after eighteen centuries of
degradation, in which the church came to be the apocalyptic Babylon
and ripened for judgment, the time has come when the suspended
apostolate has been restored to prepare the way for the last things.
Very confidently was it at first maintained that none of their members
should die, but should live to see the final consummation. But after
death had removed so many from among them, and even the apostles
<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>
one after another, it was merely said that those are already born who
should see the last day. It may come any day, any hour. It begins
with the first resurrection (Rev. xx. 5) and the <q>changing</q> of the
saints that are alive (the wise virgins, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the Irvingites), who will be
caught up to the Lord in the clouds and in a higher sphere be joined
with the Lord in the marriage supper of the Lamb. They are safely
hidden while antichrist persecutes the other Christians, the foolish
virgins, who only can be saved by means of painful suffering, and
executes judgment on Babylon. This marks the end of the Gentile
church; but then begins the conversion of the Jews, who, driven by
necessity and the persecution of sinful men, have sought and found a
refuge in Palestine. After a short victory of antichrist the Lord
visibly appears among the risen and removed. The kingdom of antichrist
is destroyed, Satan is bound, the saints live and reign with
Christ a thousand years on the earth freed from the curse. Thereafter
Satan is again let loose for a short time and works great havoc.
Then comes Satan's final overthrow, the second resurrection and last
judgment. Their liturgy, composed by the apostles, is a compilation
from the Anglican and Catholic sources. Sacerdotalism and sacrifice
are prominent and showy priestly garments are regarded as requisite.
Yet they repudiate the Romish doctrine of the bloodless repetition of
the bleeding sacrifice, as well as the doctrine of transubstantiation.
But they strictly maintain the contribution of the tenth as a duty
laid upon Christians by Heb. vii. 4. Their typical view of the Old
Testament history and legislation, especially of the tabernacle, is most
arbitrary and baseless. Their first published statement appeared in
1836 in an apostolic <q><emph>Letter to the Patriarchs, Bishops, and Presidents
of the Church of Christ in all Lands, and to emperors, kings, and princes
of all baptized nations</emph>,</q> which was sent to the most prominent among
those addressed, even to the pope, but produced no result. After this
they began to prosecute their missionary work openly. But they
gave their attention mainly to those already believers, and took no
part in missions to the heathen, as they were sent neither to the
heathen nor to unbelievers, but only to gather and save believers. In
their native land of England, where at first they had great success,
their day seems already past. In North America they succeeded in
founding only two congregations. They prospered better in Germany
and Switzerland, where they secured several able theologians, chief of
all Thiersch, the professor of Theology in Marburg, the Tertullian of
this modern Montanism (died 1885), and founded about eighty small
congregations with some 5,000 members, chief of which are those of
Berlin, Stettin, Königsberg, Leipzig, Marburg, Cassel, Basel, Augsburg,
etc. Even among the Catholic clergy of Bavaria this movement
found response; but that was checked by a series of depositions and
<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>
excommunications during 1857.&mdash;In 1882 the Lutheran pastor Alpers
of Gehrden in Hanover was summoned to appear before the consistory
to answer for his Irvingite views. He denied the charge and referred
to his good Lutheran preaching. As, however, he had taken the
sacramental <q>sealing</q> from Irvingite apostles, the court regarded
this as proof of his having joined the party and so deposed him.<note place='foot'>Oliphant, <q>Life of Ed. Irving.</q> 3rd edition. London, 1865.
Carlyle, in <q>Miscellaneous Essays.</q> Brown, <q>Personal Reminiscences
of Ed. Irving,</q> in <emph>Expositor</emph>. 3 ser., vol. vi., pp. 216, 257. Miller,
<q>History and Doctrine of Irvingism,</q> 2 vols. London, 1878.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_11'/>
11. <emph>The Darbyites and Adventists.</emph>&mdash;Related on the one hand to
Irvingism by their expectation of the immediately approaching
advent and by their regarding themselves as the saints of the last
time who would alone be saved, the <emph>Darbyites</emph>, on the other hand,
by their absolute independentism form a complete contrast to the
Irvingite hierarchism. John Darby, 1800-1882, first an advocate, then
a clergyman of the Anglican church, breaking away from Anglicanism,
founded between 1820 and 1830 a sectarian, apocalyptic,
independent community at Plymouth (whence the name <emph>Plymouth
Brethren</emph>), but in 1838 settled in Geneva, and in 1840 went to Canton
Vaud, where Lausanne and Vevey have become the headquarters
of the sect. All clerical offices, all ecclesiastical forms are of the
evil one, and are evidence of the corruption of the church. There
is only one office, the spiritual priesthood of all believers, and every
believer has the right to preach and dispense the sacraments. Not
only the Catholic, but also the Protestant church is a <q>Balaam
Church,</q> and since the departure of the apostles no true church has
existed. In doctrine they are strictly Calvinistic.<note place='foot'>Darby, <q>Personal Recollections,</q> London, 1881.</note>&mdash;The <emph>Adventists</emph>.
Regarding the 2,300 days of Dan. viii. 14 as so many years, W.
Miller of New York and Boston proclaimed in 1833 that the second
advent would take place on the night of October 23rd, 1847, and
convinced many thousands of the correctness of his calculations.
When at last the night referred to arrived the believers continued
assembled in their tabernacles waiting, but in vain, for the promise
(Matt. xxiv. 30, 31; 1 Cor. xv. 52; 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17), at <q>the voice
of the archangel and the trump of God to be caught up in the clouds
to meet the Lord in the air.</q> This miscalculation, however, did not
shake the Adventists' belief in the near approach of the Lord, but
their number rather increased from year to year. Most zealous in
propagating their views by journals and tracts, evangelists and
missionaries, is a branch of the sect founded by James White of
<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>
Michigan, whose adherents, because they keep the Sabbath in place
of the Lord's Day, are called <emph>Seventh Day Adventists</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_12'/>
12. <emph>The Mormons or Latter Day Saints.</emph>&mdash;Jos. Smith, a broken down
farmer of Vermont, who took to knavish digging for hid treasures,
affirmed in 1825, that under direction of divine revelations and
visions, he had excavated on Comora hill in New York State, golden
tablets in a stone kist on which sacred writings were engraved. A
prophet's spectacles, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, two pierced stones which as a Mormon Urim
and Thummim lay beside them, enabled him to understand and
translate them. He published the translation in <q>the Book of
Mormon.</q> According to this book, the Israelites of the ten tribes
had migrated under their leader, Lehi, to America. There they
divided into two peoples; the ungodly Lamanites, answering to the
modern Redskins, and the pious Nephites. The latter preserved
among them the old Israelitish histories and prophecies, and through
miraculous signs in heaven and earth obtained knowledge of the birth
of Christ that had meanwhile taken place. Toward the end of the
fourth century after Christ, however, the Lamanites began a terrible
war of extermination against the Nephites, in consequence of which the
latter were rooted out with the exception of the prophet Mormon and
his son Moroni. Mormon recorded his revelations on the golden
tablets referred to, and concealed them as the future witness for the
saints of the last days on the earth. Smith proclaimed himself now
called on of God, on the basis of these documents and the revelations
made to him, to found the church of <emph>The Latter Day Saints</emph>. The
widow of a preacher in New York proved indeed that the Book of
Mormon was almost literally a plagiarism from a historico-didactic
romance written by her deceased husband, Sal. Spaulding. The MS.
had passed into the hands of Sidney Rigdon, formerly a Baptist
minister and then a bookseller's assistant, subsequently Smith's right-hand
man. But even this did not disturb the believers. In 1831
Smith with his followers settled at Kirtland in Ohio. To avoid the
daily increasing popular odium, he removed to Missouri, and thence
to Illinois, and founded there, in 1840, the important town of Nauvoo
with a beautiful temple. By diligence, industry and good discipline,
the wealth, power and influence of their commonwealth increased,
but in the same proportion the envy, hatred and prejudices of the
people, which charged them with the most atrocious crimes. In 1844,
to save bloodshed the governor ordered the two chiefs, Jos. and Hiram
Smith, to surrender to voluntary imprisonment awaiting a regular
trial. But furious armed mobs attacked the prison and shot down
both. The roughs of the whole district then gathered in one great
troop, destroyed the town of Nauvoo, burned the temple and drove out
the inhabitants. These, now numbering 15,000 men, in several successive
<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>
expeditions amid indescribable hardships pressed on <q>through
the wilderness</q> over the Rocky Mountains, in order to erect for themselves
a Zion on the other side. Smith's successor was the carpenter,
Brigham Young. The journey occupied two full years, 1845-1847.
In the great Salt Lake basin of Utah they founded <emph>Salt Lake City</emph>, or
the New Jerusalem, as the capital of their wilderness state <emph>Deseret</emph>.
The gold digging of the neighbouring state of California did not
allure them, for their prophet told them that to pave streets, build
houses and sow fields was better employment than seeking for gold.
So here again they soon became a flourishing commonwealth.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_13'/>
13. In common with the Irvingites, who recognised in them their
own diabolic caricature, the Mormons restored the apostolic and prophetic
office, insisted upon the continuance of the gift of tongues
and miracles, expected the speedy advent of the Lord, reintroduced
the payment of tithes, etc. But what distinguished them from all
Christian sects was the proclamation of polygamy as a religious
duty, on the plea that only those women who had been <q>sealed</q>
to a Latter-day Saint would share in the blessedness of life eternal.
This was probably first introduced by Young in consequence of a
new <q>divine revelation,</q> but down to 1852 kept secret and denied
before <q>the Gentiles.</q> The ambiguous book of Mormon was set
meanwhile more and more in the background, and the teachings
and prophecies of their prophet brought more and more to the front.
<q>The Voice of Warning to all Nations</q> of the zealous proselyte
Parly Pratt, formerly a Campbellite preacher, exercised a great
influence in spreading the sect. But the most gifted of them all
was Orson Pratt, Rigdon's successor in the apostolate. To him
mainly is ascribed the construction of its later, highly fantastic
religious system which, consisting of elements gathered from Neo-platonism,
gnosticism, and other forms of theosophical mysticism,
embraces all the mysteries of time and eternity. Its fundamental
ideas are these: There are gods without number; all are polygamists
and their wives are sharers of their glory and bliss. They are the
fathers of human souls who here on earth ripen for their heavenly
destiny. Jesus is the first born son of the highest god by his first
wife; he was married on earth to Mary Magdalene, the sisters Martha
and Mary and other women. Those saints who here fulfil their
destiny become after death gods, while they are arranged according to
their merit in various ranks and with prospect of promotion to higher
places. At the end of this world's course, Jesus will come again, and,
enthroned in the temple of Salt Lake City, exercise judgment against
all <q>Gentiles</q> and apostates, etc.&mdash;The constitution of the Mormon
State is essentially theocratic. At the head stood the president,
Brigham Young, as prophet, patriarch, and priest-king, in whose
<pb n='445'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>
hands are all the threads of the spiritual as well as secular administration.
A high council alongside of him, consisting of seventy
members, as also the prophets and apostles, bishops and elders, and
generally the whole richly organized hierarchy, are only the pliable
instruments of his all-commanding will. Every one on entering the
society surrenders his whole property, and after that contributes a
tenth of his yearly income and personal labour to the common purse
of the community. Soon numerous missionaries were sent forth who
crossed the Atlantic, and attained great success, especially in Scotland,
England and Scandinavia, but also in North-West Germany and
in Switzerland. On removing the misunderstanding that prevailed
about their social and political condition, and supplying the penniless
out of the rich immigration fund with the means to make
the journey, they persuaded great crowds of their new converts to
accompany them to Utah.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_14'/>
14. In 1849 the Mormons had asked Congress for the apportioning
of the district colonized by them as an independent and autonomous
<q>State</q> in the union, but were granted, in 1850, only the constitution
of a <q>territory</q> under the central government at Washington, and
the appointment of their patriarch, Young, as its governor. Accustomed
to absolute rule, in two years he drove out all the other
officers appointed by the union. He was then deprived of office, but
the new governor, Col. Sefton, appointed in 1854, with the small
armament supplied him could not maintain his position and
voluntarily retired. When afterwards in 1858 Governor Cumming,
appointed by president Buchanan, entered Utah with a strong
military force, Young armed for a decisive struggle. A compromise,
however, was effected. A complete amnesty was granted to the
saints, the soldiers of the union entered peacefully into the Salt-Lake
City, and Young assumed tolerably friendly relations with the
governor, who, nevertheless, by the erection of a fort commanding the
city made the position safe for himself and his troops. On the outbreak
of the war of Secession in 1861 the troops of the union were for
the most part withdrawn. But all the more energetically did the
central government at the close of the war in 1865 resolve upon the
complete subjugation of the rebel saints, having learnt that since
1852 numerous murders had taken place in the territory, and that
the disappearance of whole caravans of colonists was not due to
attacks of Indians, who would have scalped their victims, but to a
secret Mormon fraternity called Danites (Judges xviii.), brothers of
Gideon (Judges vi. ff.) or Angels of Destruction, which, obedient to the
slightest hint from the prophet, had undertaken to avenge by bloody
terrorism any sign of resistance to his authority, to arrest any
tendency to apostasy, and to guard against the introduction of any
<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>
foreign element. The Union Pacific Railway opened in 1869 deprived
the <q>Kingdom of God</q> of its most powerful protection, its geographical
isolation, while the rich silver mines discovered at the same
time in Utah, peopled city and country with immense flocks of
<q>Gentiles.</q> The nemesis, which brought the Mormon bishop Lee,
twenty years after the deed, under the lash of the high court of
justiciary as involved in the horrible massacre of a large party of
emigrants at Mountain Meadows in 1857, would probably have also
befallen the prophet himself as the main instigator of this and many
other crimes had he not by a sudden death two months later, in his
seventy-fifth year, escaped the jurisdiction of any earthly tribunal (died
1877). A successor was not chosen, but supreme authority is in the
hands of the college of twelve apostles with the elder John Taylor at
their head.&mdash;Repeated attempts made since 1874 by the United States
authorities by penal enactments to root out polygamy among the
Mormons have always failed, because its actual existence could never
be legally proved. The witness called could or would say nothing,
since the <q>sealing</q> was always secretly performed, and the women
concerned denied that a marriage had been entered into with the
accused, or if one confessed herself his married wife she refused to
give any evidence about his domestic relations.&mdash;Recently a split has
occurred among the Mormons. By far the larger party is that of the
<q>Salt Lake Mormons,</q> which holds firmly by polygamy and all the
other institutions introduced by Young and since his time. The
other party is that of the Kirtland, or Old Mormons, headed by the
son of their founder, Jos. Smith, who had been passed over on account
of his youth, which repudiates all these as unsupported novelties and
restores the true Mormonism of the founder. The Old Mormons not
only oppose polygamy, but also all more recently introduced doctrines.
They are called Kirtland Mormons from the first temple built by their
founder at Kirtland in 1814, which having fallen into ruins, was
restored by Geo. Smith, jun., and became the centre of the Old
Mormon denomination. In April 1885 they held there their first
synod, attended by 200 deputies.<note place='foot'>Stenhouse, <q>An Englishwoman in Utah, the story of a Life's
Experience in Mormonism.</q> 2nd ed. London, 1880. Gunnison,
<q>The Mormons.</q> New York, 1884. Burton, <q>The City of the Saints.</q>
London, 1861.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_15'/>
15. <emph>The Taepings in China.</emph>&mdash;Hung-sen-tsenen, born in 1813 in the
province of Shan-Tung, was destined for the learned profession but
failed in his examination at Canton. There he first, in 1833, came
into contact with Protestant missionaries, whose misunderstood words
awakened in him the belief that he was called to perform great things.
<pb n='447'/><anchor id='Pg447'/>
At the same time he there got possession of some Christian Chinese
tracts. Failing in his examination a second time in 1837, he fell into
a dangerous illness and had a series of visions in which an old man
with a golden beard appeared, handing to him the insignia of
imperial rank, and commanding him to root out the demons. After
his recovery he became an elementary teacher. A relative called Li
visited him in 1843. The Christian tracts were again sought out and
carefully studied. Sen now recognised in the old man of his visions
the God of the Christians and in himself the younger brother of Jesus.
The two baptized one another and won over two young relatives to
their views. Expelled from their offices, they went in 1844 to the
province of Kiang Se as pencil and ink sellers, preached diligently the
new doctrine and founded numerous small congregations of their sect.
The American missionaries at Canton heard of the success of their
preaching, and Sen accepted an invitation to join them in 1847. The
missionary Roberts had a great esteem for him and intended to
baptize him, when in consequence of stories spread about him their
relations became strained. Sen now returned in 1848 to his companions
in Kiang Se, who had diligently and successfully continued
their preaching. In 1850 they began to attract attention by the
violent destruction of idols. When now all the remnants of a pirate
band joined them as converts, they were in common with these persecuted
by the government and proclaimed rebels. The expulsion of
the hated Mantshu dynasty, which two hundred years before had displaced
the Ming dynasty, and the overthrow of idolatry were now
their main endeavour, and in 1857 they organized under Sen a regular
rebellion for the setting up of a Taeping dynasty, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, of universal
peace. The Taeping army advanced unhindered, all Mantschu
soldiers who fell into its hands were massacred, and of the inhabitants
of the provinces conquered, only those were spared who joined their
ranks. In March, 1853, they stormed the second capital of the empire,
Nankin, the old residence of the Ming dynasty. There Sen fixed his
residence and styled himself Tien-Wang, the Divine Prince. He
assigned to ten subordinate princes the government of the conquered
provinces, almost the half of the immense empire. Thousands of
bibles were circulated; the ten commandments proclaimed as the
foundation of law, many writings, prayers and poems composed for
the instruction of the people, and these with the bible made subjects
of examination for entrance to the learned order. An Arian theory
of the trinity was set forth; the Father is the one personal God,
whose likeness in bodily human form Sen strictly forbade, destroying
the Catholic images as well as the Chinese idols. Jesus is the first-born
son of God, yet not himself God, sent by the Father into the
world in order to enlighten it by his doctrine and to redeem it by his
<pb n='448'/><anchor id='Pg448'/>
atoning sufferings. Sen, the younger brother of Jesus, was sent into
the world to spread the doctrine of Jesus and to expel the demons,
the Mantschu dynasty. Reception takes place through baptism. The
Lord's Supper was unknown to them. Bloody and bloodless offerings
were still tolerated. The use of wine and tobacco was forbidden; the
use of opium and trafficking in it were punished with death. But
polygamy was sanctioned. Saturday, according to the Old Testament,
was their holy day. Their service consisted only of prayer, singing
and religious instruction; but also written prayers were presented to
God by burning.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_16'/>
16. Sen himself had no more visions after 1837. But other ecstatic
prophets arose, the eastern prince Yang and the western prince Siao.
The revelations of the latter were comparatively sober, but those of
the former were in the highest degree blasphemously fanatical. He
declared himself the Paraclete promised by Jesus, and taught that
God himself, as well as Jesus, had a wife with sons and daughters.
He was at the same time a brave and successful general, and the mass
of the Taepings were enthusiastically attached to him. Sen humbly
yielded to the extravagances of this fanatic, even when Yang sentenced
him to receive forty lashes. Sen's overthrow was already resolved
upon in Yang's secret council, when Sen took courage and gave the
northern prince secret orders to murder Yang and his followers in one
night. This was done, and Sen was weak enough to allow the executioner
of his secret order to be publicly put to death so as to appease
the excited populace. But he thus again in 1856 became master
of the situation.&mdash;One of the oldest apostles of Sen, his near relative
Hung Yin, had been turned off at Hong Kong. He there attached
himself to the Basel missionary, Hamberg, who in 1852 baptized him
and made him his native helper. In hope of winning his cousin to
the true Christian faith, he travelled in 1854 to Nankin, which however
he did not reach till January, 1859. Sen received him gladly
and made him his war minister. But his efforts to introduce a purer
Christianity among the Taepings were unsuccessful, for he tried the
slippery way of accommodation, and under pressure from Sen set up
for himself a harem. In October, 1860, on Sen's repeated invitation,
his former teacher, the missionary Roberts of Nankin, arrived and
was immediately made minister for foreign affairs. The Shanghai
missionaries, several of whom visited Nankin, had interesting interviews
with Yin in 1860, but not with the emperor, as they refused to
go on their knees before him. They were encouraged by Yin to hope
for a future much needed purifying of Taeping Christianity. Yang's
revelations, however, held their ground after as well as before, and
were increased by further absurdities. To such crass fanaticism was
now added the inhuman cruelty with which they massacred the
<pb n='449'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>
vanquished and wasted the conquered cities and districts. Had the
European powers ranged themselves in a friendly and peaceful
attitude alongside of the Taepings, China might now have been a
Christian empire. Instead of this the English, on account of the
extreme opposition of the Taepings to the opium traffic, took up a
hostile position toward them, while they were also in disfavour with
the French, who had been denounced by them as idolaters on account
of their Romish image worship. Down to the beginning of 1862, however,
Yin's influence had prevented any hostile proceedings against
the Europeans in spite of many provocations given. But after that
the Taepings refused them any quarter. Roberts fled by night to
save his life. Against disciplined European troops the rebels could
not hold their ground. One city after another was taken from them,
and at last, in July 1864, their capital Nankin. Sen was found
poisoned in his burning palace.<note place='foot'>Wilson, <q>The <q>Ever-Victorious Army</q>: a History of the Chinese
Campaign under Lieut.-Col. C. G. Gordon, and of the Suppression of
the Taeping Rebellion.</q> Edinburgh.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_17'/>
17. <emph>The Spiritualists.</emph>&mdash;The shoemaker's apprentice, Andrew Jackson
Davis of Poughkeepsie on the Hudson, in his nineteenth year fell into
a magnetic sleep and composed his first work, <q>The Principles of
Nature, Her Divine Revelations and a Voice to Mankind,</q> in 1845.
He declared its utterances to be spiritual revelations from the other
world. But his later writings composed in working hours made the
same claim, especially the five volume work, <q>Great Harmonia, being
a Philosophical Revelation of the Natural, Spiritual, and Celestial
Universe,</q> 1850 ff. Both went through numerous editions and were
translated into German. The great spiritual manifestation promised
in the first work was not long delayed. In a house bought by the
family of Fox in Hydesville in New York State a spectral knocking
was often heard. Through the intercourse which the two youngest
daughters, aged nine and twelve years, had with the ghosts, the skeleton
of a murdered five years' old child of a pedlar was discovered buried
in the cellar, and when the family soon thereafter left the house, the
ghosts went with them and continued their communications by table
turning, table rapping, table writing, etc. The thing now became
epidemic. Hundreds and thousands of male and female <emph>mediums</emph> arose
and held an extremely lively and varied intercourse with innumerable
departed ones of earlier and later times. The believers soon
numbered millions, including highly educated persons of all ranks,
even such exact chemists as Mapes and Hare. An abundant literature
in books and journals, as well as Sunday services, frequent camp-meetings
and annual congresses formed a propaganda for the alleged
<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>
spiritualism, which soon found its way across the ocean and won
enthusiastic adherents for all confessions in all European countries,
especially in London, Paris, Brussels, St. Petersburg, Vienna, Dresden,
Leipzig, etc. They now broke up into two parties called respectively
Spiritualists and Spiritists. The former put in the foreground physical
experiments with astonishing results and miraculous effects;
the latter, with the Frenchman Allan Kardec (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Rivail</foreign>) as their leader,
give prominence to the teaching of spirits by direct communication.
The former in reference to the origin of the human soul held by the
theory of traducianism; the latter to that of pre-existence in connection
with a doctrine of re-incarnation of spirits by reason of
growing purity and perfection. The latter see in Christ the incarnation
of a spirit of the highest order; the former merely the purest
and most perfect type of human nature. But neither admit the
real central truth of Christianity, the reconciliation of sinful humanity
with God in Christ. Both evaporate the resurrection into a
mere spectral spirit manifestation; and the disclosures and utterances
of the spirits with both are equally trivial, silly, and vain.&mdash;In
England the famous palæontologist and collaborateur of Darwin,
Alfr. Russel Wallace, and the no less celebrated physicist Wm. Crookes,
are apologists of spiritualism. The latter declared in 1879 that to the
three well-known conditions of matter, solid, fluid and gaseous, should
be added a fourth, <q>radiant,</q> and that there is the borderland where
force and matter meet. And in Germany the acute Leipzig astrophysicist
Fr. Zöllner, after a whole series of spiritualistic séances
conducted by the American medium Slade in 1877 and 1878 had been
carefully scrutinized and tested by himself and several of his most
accomplished scientific colleagues, was convinced of the existence
and reality of higher <q>four dimension</q> space in the spirit world,
to which by reason of its fourth dimension the power belonged
of passing through earthly bodily matter. The philosophers I. H.
Fichte of Stuttgart and Ulrici of Halle have admitted the reality of
spiritualistic communications and allege them as proofs of immortality.
Among German theologians Luthardt of Leipzig regards it
all as the work of demons who take advantage for their own ends of
the moral-religious dissolution of the modern world and its consequent
nerve shaking that prevails, just as in the ancient world in the beginnings
of Christianity. Zöckler of Greifswald finds an analogy between
it and the demoniacal possession of New Testament times; so too
Martensen in his <q>Jacob Boehme,</q> and on the Catholic side W.
Schneider; while Splittgerber refers most of the manifestations in
question to a merely subjective origin in <q>the right side of the
human soul life,</q> but puts the materialization of spirits in the category
of delusive jugglery. Spiritualism has scarcely rallied from the
<pb n='451'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>
obloquy cast upon it by the unmasking of the tricks of the famous
medium Miss Florence Cook in London in 1880 and of the distinguished
spirit materialiser Bastian by the Grand-duke John of
Austria in 1884.<note place='foot'>Edmonds, <q>American Spiritualism.</q> 2 vols. New York, 1858.
Cox, <q>Spiritualism answered by Science.</q> London, 1872. Crookes,
<q>Spiritualism and Science.</q> London, 1874. Wallace, <q>A Defence
of Spiritualism.</q> London, 1874. Owen, <q>The Debatable Land.</q>
New York, 1872. Carpenter, <q>Mesmerism, Spiritualism, etc., Historically
and Scientifically Considered.</q> London, 1877. Mahan, <q>The
Phenomena of Spiritualism Scientifically Explained and Exposed.</q>
London, 1875. Horne, <q>Incidents in His Life.</q> London, 1863.
<q>Lights and Shadows of Spiritualism.</q> London, 1877.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_211_Para_18'/>
18. To the domain of unquestionable illusion belongs also the
spiritualistic movement of Indian <emph>Theosophism</emph> or <emph>Occultism</emph>. The
American Col. Olcott of New York had already moved for twenty-two
years in spiritualist circles when in 1874 he met with Madame
Blavatsky, widow of a Russian general who had been governor of
Erivan in Armenia. She professed to have been from her eighth year
in communication with spirits, then to have had secret intercourse
with the Mahatmas, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> spirits of old Indian penitents, during a
seven years' residence on the Himalayas. She now promised to introduce
the colonel to them. Olcott and Blavatsky founded at New
York in 1875 a society for research in the department of the mystic
sciences, travelled in 1878 to Further India and Ceylon, and settled
finally in Madras, whence by word and writing they proclaimed
through the whole land theosophism or occultism as the religion
of the future, which, consisting in a medley of Hinduism and Buddhism,
enriched by spiritualistic revelations of Mahatmas, vouched
for by spiritualistic signs and miracles and conformed to the most
recent philosophical and scientific researches in America and Europe,
aimed at heaping contempt upon Christianity and finally driving
it from the field. As fanatical opponents of Christian missions in
India they were strongly supported by the Brahman and Buddhist
hierarchy, and soon obtained for the theosophical society founded
by them not only numerous adherents from among the natives
but also many Englishman befooled by their spiritualistic swindle.
As apostle and literary pioneer of the new religion appeared an
Anglo-Indian called Sinnett. In spring, 1884, Madame Blavatsky
and Col. Olcott went on a propagandist tour to Europe, where, in
England, France, Austria, and Hungary, they won many converts,
while Col. Olcott at Elberfeld and Madame Blavatsky at Odessa
founded branches of their theosophical society.&mdash;But meanwhile in
<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>
India affairs assumed a threatening aspect. Blavatsky on her departure
had entrusted the keys of her dwelling and her mysterious
cabinet with its various panels, falling doors, etc., to Mr. and Mrs.
Coulomb, who had been hitherto her assistants in all her juggleries.
Madame Coulomb, however, quarrelled with the board of theosophists
at Madras, and revenged herself by placing in the hands of the
Scottish mission letters addressed by Blavatsky to herself and her
husband which supplied evidence that all her spiritualistic manifestations
were only common tricks. In addition she gave public
exhibitions in which she demonstrated to the spectators <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad oculos</foreign>
the spiritual manifestations of the Mahatmas, and subsequently published
an <q>Account of My Acquaintanceship with Madame Blavatsky,
1872-1884,</q> with discoveries of her earlier rogueries. Meanwhile the
swindler had herself in December, 1884, returned to Madras in company
with several believers gathered up in England, among others a
young English clergyman, Leadbeater, who some days previously in
Ceylon had formally adopted Buddhism. The theosophists now demanded
that the reputed cheat and deceiver should be brought before
a civil court. The president, however, declared that the investigations
and judgment of a profane court of law could not be accepted to the
mysteries of occultism, but promised a careful examination by a commission
appointed by himself, and Blavatsky thought it advisable
<q>for the restoration of her health in a cooler climate</q> to make off
from the scene of conflict.<note place='foot'>Sinnett, <q>Esoteric Buddhism.</q> London, 1883.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Section_212'/>
<head>§ 212. Antichristian Socialism and Communism.</head>

<p>
While the antichristian spirit of the age breaks out in
various theoretical forms in our literature, there also abound
social and communistic movements of a practical kind.
Socialism and communism both aim at a thorough-going
reform of the rights of property and possession in strict
proportion to the labour spent thereon. They are, however,
distinguished in this, that while communism declares war
against all private property and demands absolute community
of goods, socialism, at least in its older and nobler forms,
proceeding from the idea of precise correspondence between
capital and labour, seeks to have expression given to this in
fact. From the older socialism, which endeavoured to reach
<pb n='453'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>
its end in a peaceful way within the existing lines of civil
order, a later social democracy is to be distinguished by its
decidedly politico-revolutionary character and tendency to
attach itself more to communism. This modern socialism
thinks to open the way to the realization of its hare-brained
ideas by the confusion and overthrow of existing law and
order.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_212_Para_1'/>
1. <emph>The Beginnings of Modern Communism.</emph>&mdash;As early as 1796 Babeuf
published in Paris a communistic manifesto which maintained the
thesis that natural law gives all men an equal right to the enjoyment
of all goods. His ideas were subsequently systematized and developed
by Fourier, Proudhon, Cabet, and Louis Blanc in France, and by
Weibling and Stirner in Germany. In a treatise of 1840 Proudhon
answered the question, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Qu'est-ce que la propriété?</foreign> in words which
afterwards became proverbial, and formed the motto of communism:
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>La propriété c'est le vol.</foreign> But the mere negation of property affords
no permanent standing ground. All altars must be thrown down;
all religion rooted out as the plague of humanity; the family and
marriage, as the fountain of all selfishness, must be abolished; all
existing governments must be overthrown; all Europe must be turned
into one great social democracy. A secret communistic propaganda
spread over all western Europe, had its head centres in Belgium
and Switzerland, crossed the Alps and the Pyrenees, as well as the
Channel, and found a congenial soil even in Russia.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_212_Para_2'/>
2. <emph>St. Simonism.</emph>&mdash;The Count St. Simon of Paris, reduced to poverty
by speculation, proposed by means of a thorough organization of
industry to found a new and happy state of things in which there
would be pure enjoyment without poverty and care. An attempted
suicide, which led however to his death in 1825, made him in the
eyes of his disciples a saviour of the world. The July revolution of
1830 gave to the new universal religion, which reinstated the flesh in
its long lost rights and sought to assign to each individual the place
in the commonwealth for which he was fitted, some advantage.
<q>Father</q> Enfantin, whom his followers honoured as the highest
revelation of deity, contended with pompous phrases and in fantastic
style for the emancipation of woman and against the unnatural institution
of marriage. But St. Simonism soon excited public ridicule,
was pronounced immoral by the courts of justice, and the remnants
of its votaries fled from the scorn of the people and the vengeance
of the law to Egypt, where they soon disappeared.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_212_Para_3'/>
3. <emph>Owenists and Icarians.</emph>&mdash;The Scotch mill-owner <emph>Rob. Owen</emph> went
<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/>
in 1829 to America, in order there, unhindered by religious prejudices,
clerical opposition, and police interference, to work out on a large
scale his socialistic schemes for improving the world, which in a
small way he believed he had proved already among his Scotch mill-operatives.
He bought for this purpose from the Württemberger
Rapp the colony of Harmony (<ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>§ 211, 6</ref>); but wanting the necessary
capital for the socialistic commonwealth there established, and failing
to realize his expectations, discontent, disorder, and opposition got the
upper hand, and in 1826 Owen was obliged to abandon all his property.
He now returned to England, and addressed himself in treatises, tracts,
and lectures to the working classes of the whole land, in order to win
them over to his ideas. A vast brotherhood for mutual benefit and
for the enjoyment of their joint earnings was to put an end to earth's
misery, which the positive religions had not lessened but only increased.
In 1836, in the great industrial cities socialist unions with
nearly half a million members were formed, with their head centre
and annual congress at Birmingham. The practical schemes of Owen,
however, had no success in England, and his societies no permanency.
He died in 1858.&mdash;Still more disastrous was the fate of the Icarian
Colony, founded in Texas in 1848 by the Frenchman <emph>Stephen Cabet</emph>,
author of <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Voyage en Icarie, Roman philos. et social</foreign>,</q> 1840, as an
attempt to realize his communistic-philanthropic ideas on the other
side of the Atlantic. The colonists soon found their sanguine hopes
bitterly disappointed, and hurled against their leader reproaches
and threats. Some ex-Icarians accused him in 1849 before the Paris
police-court as a swindler, and he was condemned to two years' imprisonment
and five years' loss of civil privileges. Cabet now hastened
to France, and on appeal obtained reversion of his sentence in 1851.
Returning to America, he founded a new Icarian colony at Nauvoo
in Illinois. But there, too, everything went wrong, and a revolt of
the colonists obliged him to flee. He died in 1856.<note place='foot'>Sargent, <q>Rob. Owen and his Social Philosophy.</q> London, 1860.
Nordhoff, <q>Communistic Societies in the United States.</q> London,
1875.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_212_Para_4'/>
4. <emph>The International Working-Men's Association.</emph>&mdash;Local and national
working-men's unions with a socialistic organization had for a long
time existed in England, France, and Germany. The idea of a union
embracing the whole world was first broached at the great London
Exhibition in 1862, and at a conference in London on September 28th,
1864, at which all industrial countries of Europe were represented, it
assumed a practical shape by the founding of a universal international
working-men's association. Its constitution was strictly centralistic.
A directing committee in London, Carl Marx of Treves, formerly
<pb n='455'/><anchor id='Pg455'/>
<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Privatdocent</foreign> of philosophy at Bonn, standing at its head as dictator,
represented the supreme legislative and governing authority, while
alongside of it a general standing council held the administrative and
executive power. The latter was divided into eight sections, English,
American, French, German, Belgian, Dutch, Italian, and Spanish, and
annual international congresses at Geneva, Lausanne, Brussels, Basel,
and the Hague gave opportunity for general consultation on matters
of common interest. Reception as members was granted by the
giving of a diploma after six months' trial, and involved unconditional
obedience to the statutes and ordinances of the central authorities and
the payment of an annual fee. The number of members, not, however,
exclusively drawn from the working classes, is said to have
reached two and a half millions. The society adopted the current
socialistic and communistic ideas and tendencies. The religious
principle of the association was therefore: atheism and materialism;
the political: absolute democracy; the social: equal rights of labour
and profit, with abolition of private property, hereditary rights,
marriage, and family; and as means for realizing this programme,
unaccomplishable by peaceable methods, revolution and rebellion, fire
and sword, poison, petroleum and dynamite. Such means have been
used already in various ways by the international throughout the
Romance countries; but specially in the brief Reign of Terror of the
Paris Commune, March and April, 1871, in the relatively no less
violent attempted revolt at Alcoy in Southern Spain in July, 1873.
But meanwhile differences appeared within the society, which were
formulated at the Hague Congress in 1872, and led to splits, which
greatly lessened its unity, influence, and power to do mischief, so that
this congress may perhaps be regarded as the first beginning of its
end.<note place='foot'>Onslow-Yorke, <q>The Secret History of the International Working-Men's
Association.</q> London, 1872. Lissagaray, <q>History of the
Commune of 1871.</q> Translated by Aveling. London, 1886.</note>
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_212_Para_5'/>
5. <emph>German Social Democracy.</emph>&mdash;<emph>Ferd. Lassalle</emph>, son of a rich Jewish
merchant of Breslau, after a full course of study in philosophy and
law, began in 1848 to take a lively part in the advanced movements of
the age, and when he found among the liberal citizens no favour for
his socialistic ideas turned exclusively to the working classes. In
answer to the question as to what was to be done, by the central committee
of a working-men's congress at Leipzig, he wrought out in
1863 with great subtlety in an open letter the fundamental idea of
his universal redemption. All plans of self-help to relieve the distress
of working men hitherto proposed (specially that of Schulze-Delitzsch)
break down over the <q>iron economic law of wages,</q> in consequence of
<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/>
which under the dominion of capital and the large employers of
labour wages are always with fatalistic necessity reduced to the point
indispensable for supplying a working man's family with the absolute
necessaries of life. The working classes, however, have the right according
to the law of nature to a full equivalent for their labour, but
in order to reach this they must be their own undertakers, and where
self-help is only a vain illusion, state help must afford the means. By
insisting on the right to universal suffrage the working classes have
obtained a decided majority in the legislative assemblies, and there
secured a government of the future in accordance with their needs.
On these principles the Universal German Society of Working Men
was constituted, with Lassalle as its president, which position he held
till his death in a duel in 1864. Long internal disputes and personal
recriminations led to a split at the Eisenach Congress in 1869. The
malcontents founded an independent <q>Social Democratic Working-Men's
Union,</q> under the leadership of Bebel and Liebknecht, which,
particularly successful in Saxony, Brunswick, and South Germany,
represents itself as the German branch of the <q>International Working-Men's
Association.</q> It adhered indeed generally to Lassalle's
programme, but objected to the extravagant adulation claimed for
Lassalle by their opponents, the proper disciples of Lassalle, who
had Hasenclaver as their leader and Berlin as their headquarters,
substituted a federal for a centralistic organization, and instead of
a great centralised government in the future desired rather a federal
republic embracing all Europe. But both declared equally in favour
of revolution; they vied with one another in bitter hatred of everything
bearing the name of religion; and wrought out with equal
enthusiasm their communistic schemes for the future. At the Gotha
Congress of 1875 a reconciliation of parties was effected. The social-democratic
agitation thus received a new impulse and assumed
threatening proportions. Yet it required such extraordinary occurrences
as the twice attempted assassination of the aged emperor, by
Hodel on May 11th, and Nobiling on June 2nd, 1878, to rouse the
government to legislative action. On the basis of a law passed in
October, 1878, for two and a half years (but in May, 1880, continued
for other three and a half years, and in May, 1884, and again in April,
1886, on each occasion extended to other two years), 200 socialist
societies throughout the German empire were suppressed, sixty-four
revolutionary journals, circulated in hundreds of thousands and with
millions of readers, and about 800 other seditious writings, were forbidden.
But that the social-democratic organization and agitation
was not thereby destroyed is proved by the fact that in August, 1880,
in an uninhabited Swiss castle lent for the purpose, in Canton Zürich,
a congress was held, attended by fifty-six German socialists, with
<pb n='457'/><anchor id='Pg457'/>
greetings by letter from sympathisers in all European countries, which
among other things passed the resolution unanimously, no longer as
had been agreed upon at Gotha, to seek their ends by lawful methods,
as by the law of the socialists impossible, but by the way of revolution.&mdash;On
the other hand, the German Imperial Chancellor Prince
Bismarck in the Reichstag, 1884, fully admitted the <q>right of the
worker to work,</q> as well as the duty of the state to ameliorate the
condition of working men as far as possible, and in three propositions:
<q>Work for the healthy workman, hospital attendance to the sick, and
maintenance to the invalided,</q> granted all that is asked for by a
healthy social policy.
</p>

<p>
<anchor id='Section_212_Para_6'/>
6. <emph>Russian Nihilism.</emph>&mdash;In Russia, too, notwithstanding a strictly
exercised censorship, the philosophico-scientific gospel of materialism
and atheism found entrance through the writings of Moleschott,
Feuerbach, Büchner, Darwin, etc. (<ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>§ 174, 3</ref>), especially among the
students. In 1860, Nihilism, springing from this seed, first assumed
the character of a philosophical and literary movement. It sought
the overthrow of all religious institutions. Then came the women's
question, claiming emancipation for the wife. The example of the
Paris Commune of 1871 contributed largely to the development of
Nihilistic idealism, its political revolutionary socialism. The Nihilist
propaganda, like an epidemic, now seized upon the academic youth,
male and female, was spread in aristocratic families by tutors and
governesses, won secret disciples among civil servants as well as
officers of the army and navy, and was enthusiastically supported by
ladies in the most cultured and exalted ranks. In order to spread its
views among the people, young men and women disguised in peasant's
dress went out among the peasants and artisans, lived and wrought
like them, and preached their gospel to them in their hours of rest.
But their efforts failed through the antipathy and apathy of the
lower orders, and the energetic interference of the government by
imprisonment and banishment thinned the ranks of the propagandists.
But all the more closely did those left bind themselves together
under their central leaders as the <q>Society for Country and Freedom,</q>
and strove with redoubled eagerness to spread revolutionary principles
by secretly printing their proclamations and other incendiary productions,
and scattering them in the streets and houses. On January
24th, 1878, the female Nihilist <emph>Vera Sassulitsch</emph> from personal revenge
dangerously wounded with a revolver General Trepoff, the dreaded
head of the St. Petersburg police. Although she openly avowed the
deed before the court and gloried in it, she was amid the acclamations
of the public acquitted. This was the hour when Nihilism exercised
its fellest terrorism. The fair, peaceful phrase, <q>To work, fight,
suffer, and die for the people,</q> was silenced; it was now, sword and
<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/>
fire, dagger and revolver, dynamite and mines for all oppressors of
the people, but above all for the agents of the police, for their spies,
for all informers and apostates. An <q>executive committee,</q> unknown
to most of the conspirators themselves, issued the death sentence; the
lot determined the executioner, who himself suffered death if he failed
to accomplish it. What was now aimed at was the assassination of
higher state officials; then the sacred person of the emperor. Three
bold attempts at assassination miscarried; the revolver shot of
Solowjews on April 14th, 1879; the mine on the railway near Moscow
that exploded too late on November 30th, 1879; the horrible attempt
to blow up the Winter Palace with the emperor and his family on
February 17th, 1880; but the fourth, a dynamite bomb thrown
between the feet of the emperor on March 13th, 1881, destroyed the
life of this noble and humane monarch, who in 1861-1863 had freed
his people from the yoke of serfdom. As for years nothing more had
been heard of Nihilist attempts, it was hoped that the government
had succeeded in putting down this diabolical rebellion, but in 1887
the news spread that an equally horrible attempt had been planned
for the sixth anniversary of the assassination of Alexander II., but
fortunately timely precautions were taken against it.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='459'/><anchor id='Pg459'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chronological Tables.</head>

<p>
<emph>First Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>14-37. The Emperor Tiberius, § 22, 1.</l>
<l>41-54. The Emperor Claudius, § 22, 1.</l>
<l>44. Execution of James the Elder, § 16.</l>
<l>51. The Council at Jerusalem, § 18, 1.</l>
<l>54-68. The Emperor Nero, § 23, 1.</l>
<l>61. Paul's Arrival at Rome, § 15.</l>
<l>63. Stoning of James the Just, § 16, 3.</l>
<l>64. Persecution of Christians in Rome, § 22, 1.</l>
<l>66-70. Jewish War, § 16.</l>
<l>81-96. The Emperor Domitian, § 22, 1.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Second Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>98-117. The Emperor Trajan, § 22, 2.</l>
<l>115. (?) Ignatius of Antioch, Martyr, § 22, 2.</l>
<l>117-138. The Emperor Hadrian, § 22, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Basilides, Valentinus, § 22, 2, 4.</l>
<l>132-135. Revolt of Barcochba, § 25.</l>
<l>Abt. 150. Celsus, § 23, 3. Marcion, § 27, 11.</l>
<l>138-161. The Emperor Antoninus Pius, § 22, 2.</l>
<l>155. Paschal Controversy between Polycarp and Amicetus, § 37, 2.</l>
<l>161-180. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius, § 22, 3.</l>
<l>165. Justin Martyr, § 30, 9.</l>
<l>166. (155?) Martyrdom of Polycarp, § 22, 3.</l>
<l>172. (156?) Montanus appears as a Prophet, § 40, 1.</l>
<l>177. Persecution of Christians at Lyons and Vienne, § 22, 3.</l>
<l>178. Irenæus made Bishop of Lyons, § 31, 2.</l>
<l>180-192. The Emperor Commodus, § 22, 3.</l>
<l>196. Paschal Controversy between Victor and Polycrates, § 37, 2.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/>

<p>
<emph>Third Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>202. Tertullian becomes Montanist, § 40, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Pantænus dies, § 31, 4.</l>
<l>220. Clement of Alexandria dies, § 31, 4.</l>
<l>235. Settlement of the Schism of Hippolytus, § 41, 1.</l>
<l>235-238. The Emperor Maximinus Thrax, § 22, 4.</l>
<l>243. Ammonius Saccus dies, § 25, 2.</l>
<l>244. Arabian Synod against Beryllus, § 33, 7.</l>
<l>249-251. The Emperor Decius, § 22, 5.</l>
<l>250. The Schism of Felicissimus, § 41, 2.</l>
<l>251. The Novatian Schism, § 41, 3.</l>
<l>253-260. The Emperor Valerian, § 22, 5.</l>
<l>254. Origen dies, § 31, 5.</l>
<l>255-256. Controversy about Heretics' Baptism, § 35, 5.</l>
<l>258. Cyprian dies, § 31, 11.</l>
<l>260-268. The Emperor Gallienus. The Toleration Edict, § 22, 5.</l>
<l>262. Synod at Rome against Sabellius and Dionysius of Alexandria, § 33, 7.</l>
<l>269. Third Synod of Antioch against Paul of Samosata, § 33, 8.</l>
<l>276. Mani dies, § 29, 1.</l>
<l>284-305. The Emperor Diocletian, § 22, 6.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Fourth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>303. Beginning of Diocletian Persecution, § 22, 6.</l>
<l>306. Synod of Elvira, § 38, 3; 45, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Meletian Schism in Egypt, § 41, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Constantius Chlorus dies, § 22, 7.</l>
<l>311. Galerius dies, § 22, 6.</l>
<l>312. Constantine's Expedition against Maxentius, § 22, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Donatist Schism in Africa, § 63, 1.</l>
<l>313. Edict of Milan, § 22, 7.</l>
<l>318. Arius is Accused, § 50, 1.</l>
<l>323-337. Constantine the Great, Sole Ruler, § 42, 2.</l>
<l>325. First Œcumenical Council at Nicæa, § 50, 1.</l>
<l>330-415. Meletian Schism at Antioch, § 50, 8.</l>
<l>335. Synod at Tyre, § 50, 2.</l>
<l>336. Athanasius Exiled. Arius dies, § 50, 2.</l>
<l>341. Council at Antioch, § 50, 2.</l>
<l>343. Persecution of Christians under Shapur II., § 64, 2.</l>
<l>344. Synod at Sardica, § 46, 3; 50, 2.</l>
<l>346. Council at Milan against Photinus, § 50, 2.</l>
<l>348. Ulfilas, Bishop of the Goths, § 76, 1.</l>
<l>350-361. Constantius, Sole Ruler, § 42, 2.</l>
<l>351. First Council at Sirmium against Marcellus, § 50, 2.</l>
<pb n='461'/><anchor id='Pg461'/>
<l>357. Second Council at Sirmium, Homoians, § 50, 3.</l>
<l>358. Third Council at Sirmium, § 50, 3.</l>
<l>359. Synods at Seleucia and Rimini, § 50, 3.</l>
<l>361-363. Emperor Julian the Apostate, § 42, 3.</l>
<l>362. Synod at Alexandria against Athanasius, § 50, 4.</l>
<l>366-384. Damasus I., Bishop of Rome, § 46, 4.</l>
<l>368. Hilary of Poitiers dies, § 47, 14.</l>
<l>373. Athanasius dies, § 47, 3.</l>
<l>379. Basil the Great dies, § 47, 4.</l>
<l>379-395. Theodosius the Great, Emperor, § 42, 4.</l>
<l>380. Synod at Saragossa, § 54, 2.</l>
<l>381. Second Œcumenical Council at Constantinople, § 50, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Ulfilas dies, § 76, 1.</l>
<l>384-398. Siricius, Bishop of Rome, § 46, 4.</l>
<l>385. Priscillian beheaded at Treves, § 54, 2.</l>
<l>390. Gregory Nazianzen dies, § 47, 4.</l>
<l>391. Destruction of the Serapeion at Alexandria, § 42, 6.</l>
<l>393. Council at Hippo Rhegius, § 59, 1.</l>
<l>397. Ambrose dies, § 47, 15.</l>
<l>399. Rufinus Condemned at Rome as an Origenist, § 51, 2.</l>
<l>400. Martin of Tours dies, § 47, 15.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Fifth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>402-417. Innocent I. of Rome, § 46, 5.</l>
<l>403. Synodus ad Quercum, § 51, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Epiphanius dies, § 47, 10.</l>
<l>407. Chrysostom dies, § 47, 8.</l>
<l>408-450. Theodosius II. in the East, § 52, 3.</l>
<l>411. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collatio cum Donatistis</foreign>, § 63, 1.</l>
<l>412. Synod at Carthage against Cœlestius, § 53, 4.</l>
<l>415. Synods at Jerusalem and Diospolis against Pelagius, § 53, 4.</l>
<l>416. Synods at Mileve and Carthage against Pelagius, § 53, 4.</l>
<l>418. General Assembly at Carthage, § 53, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Roman Schism of Eulalius and Bonifacius, § 46, 6.</l>
<l>420. Jerome dies, § 47, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Persecution of Christians under Behram V., § 64, 2.</l>
<l>422-432. Cœlestine I., Bishop of Rome, § 46, 6.</l>
<l>428. Nestorius is made Patriarch of Constantinople, § 52, 3.</l>
<l>429. Theodore of Mopsuestia dies, § 47, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The Vandals in North Africa, § 76, 3.</l>
<l>430. Cyril's Anathemas, § 52, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Augustine dies, § 47, 18.</l>
<l>431. Third Œcumenical Council at Ephesus, § 52, 3.</l>
<l>432. St. Patrick in Ireland, § 77, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>John Cassianus dies, § 47, 21.</l>
<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/>
<l>440-461. Leo I., the Great, § 46, 7; 47, 22.</l>
<l>444. Cyril of Alexandria dies, § 47, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Dioscurus succeeds Cyril, § 52, 4.</l>
<l>445. Rescript of Valentinian III., § 46, 7.</l>
<l>448. Eutyches excommunicated at Constantinople, § 52, 4.</l>
<l>449. Robber Synod at Ephesus, § 52, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Attack of Angles and Saxons upon Britain, § 77, 4.</l>
<l>451. Fourth Œcumenical Synod at Chalcedon, § 52, 4.</l>
<l>457. Theodoret dies, § 47, 9.</l>
<l>475. Semipelagian Synods at Arles and Lyons, § 53, 5.</l>
<l>476. Overthrow of the West Roman Empire, § 46, 8; 76, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Monophysite Encyclical of Basiliscus, § 52, 5.</l>
<l>482. Henoticon of the Emperor Zeno, § 52, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Severinus dies, § 76, 6.</l>
<l>484-519. The Thirty-five Years' Schism between the East and West, § 52, 5.</l>
<l>492-496. Gelasius I., Bishop of Rome, § 46, 8; 47, 22.</l>
<l>496. Battle of Zülpich. Clovis baptized, § 76, 9.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Sixth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>502. Synodus Palmaris, § 46, 8.</l>
<l>517. Council at Epaon, § 76, 5.</l>
<l>527-565. Justinian I., Emperor, § 46, 9; 52, 6.</l>
<l>529. Synods at Oranges and Valence, § 53, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Monastic Rule of Benedict of Nursia, § 85.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Suppression of the University of Athens, § 42, 4.</l>
<l>533. The Theopaschite Controversy, § 52, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Overthrow of the Vandal Empire, § 76, 3.</l>
<l>544. Condemnation of the <q>Three Chapters,</q> § 52, 6.</l>
<l>553. Fifth Œcumenical Council at Constantinople, § 52, 6.</l>
<l>554. Overthrow of the Ostrogoth Empire in Italy, § 76, 7.</l>
<l>563. Council at Braga, § 54, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>St. Columba among the Picts and Scots. § 77, 2.</l>
<l>567. Founding of the Exarchate of Ravenna, § 46, 9.</l>
<l>568. The Longobards under Alboin in Italy, § 76, 8.</l>
<l>589. Council at Toledo under Reccared, § 76, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Columbanus and Gallus in the Vosges Country, § 77, 7.</l>
<l>590-604. Gregory I., the Great, § 46, 10; 47, 22.</l>
<l>595. Gregory of Tours dies, § 90, 2.</l>
<l>596. Augustine goes as Missionary to the Anglo-Saxons, § 77, 4.</l>
<l>597. St. Columba dies, § 77, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Ethelbert baptized, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='463'/><anchor id='Pg463'/>

<p>
<emph>Seventh Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>606. Emperor Phocas recognises the Roman Primacy, § 46, 10.</l>
<l>611-641. Heraclius, Emperor, § 52, 8.</l>
<l>615. Columbanus dies, § 77, 7.</l>
<l>622. Hejira, § 65.</l>
<l>625-638. Honorius I., Pope, § 46, 11.</l>
<l>636. Isidore of Seville dies, § 90, 2.</l>
<l>637. Omar conquers Jerusalem, § 65.</l>
<l>638. Monothelite Ecthesis of Heraclius, § 52, 8.</l>
<l>640. Omar conquers Egypt, § 65.</l>
<l>642-668. Constans II., Emperor, § 52, 8.</l>
<l>646. St. Gallus dies, § 78, 1.</l>
<l>648. The Typus of Constans II., § 52, 8.</l>
<l>649-653. Martin I., Pope, § 46, 11.</l>
<l>649. First Lateran Council under Martin I., § 52, 8.</l>
<l>652. Emmeran at Regensburg, § 78, 2.</l>
<l>657. Constantine of Mananalis, § 71, 1.</l>
<l>662. Maximus Confessor, dies, § 47, 13.</l>
<l>664. Synod at Streoneshalch (<foreign rend='italic'>Syn. Pharensis</foreign>), § 77, 6.</l>
<l>668-685. Constantinus Pogonnatus, § 52, 8; 71, 1.</l>
<l>677. Wilfrid among the Frisians, § 78, 3.</l>
<l>678-682. Agatho, Pope, § 46, 11.</l>
<l>680. Sixth Œcumenical Council at Constantinople (Trullanum I.), § 52, 8.</l>
<l>690. Wilibrord among the Frisians, § 78, 3.</l>
<l>692. Concilium Quinisextum (Trullanum II.), § 63, 3.</l>
<l>696. Rupert in Bavaria (Salzburg), § 78, 2.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Eighth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>711. The Saracens conquer Spain, § 81.</l>
<l>715-731. Pope Gregory II., § 66, 1; 78, 4.</l>
<l>716. Winifrid goes to the Frisians, § 78, 4.</l>
<l>717-741. Leo III., the Isaurian, Emperor, § 66, 1.</l>
<l>718. Winifrid in Rome, § 78, 4.</l>
<l>722. Winifrid in Thuringia and Hesse, § 78, 4.</l>
<l>723. Winifrid a second time at Rome, consecrated Bishop, etc., § 78, 4.</l>
<l>724. Destruction of the Wonder-working Oak at Geismar, § 78, 4.</l>
<l>726. Leo's First Edict against Image Worship, § 66, 1.</l>
<l>730. Leo's Second Edict against Image Worship, § 66, 1.</l>
<l>731. Gregory III., Pope, § 66, 1; 78, 4; 82, 1.</l>
<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/>
<l>732. Boniface, Archbishop and Apostolic Vicar, § 78, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Battle at Poitiers, § 81.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Separation of Illyria from the Roman See by Leo the Isaurian, § 66, 1.</l>
<l>735. The Venerable Bede dies, § 90, 2.</l>
<l>739. Wilibrord dies, § 78, 3.</l>
<l>741. Charles Martel dies, § 78, 5. Gregory III. dies. Leo the Isaurian dies.</l>
<l>741-752. Pope Zacharias, § 78, 5, 7; 82, 1.</l>
<l>741-775. Constantinus Copronymus, Emperor, § 66, 2.</l>
<l>742. Concilium Germanicum, § 78, 5.</l>
<l>743. Synod at Liptinä, § 78, 5; 86, 2.</l>
<l>744. Synod at Soissons, § 78, 5.</l>
<l>745. Boniface, Archbishop of Mainz, § 78, 5.</l>
<l>752. Childeric III. deposed, Pepin the Short, King, § 78, 5; 82, 1.</l>
<l>754. Iconoclastic Council at Constantinople, § 66, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Pepin's donation to the Chair of St. Peter, § 82, 1.</l>
<l>755. Boniface dies, § 78, 7.</l>
<l>Abt. 760. Rule of St. Chrodegang of Metz, § 84, 4.</l>
<l>767. Synod at Gentilliacum, § 91, 2; 92, 1.</l>
<l>768-814. Charlemagne, § 82, 2, 4; 90, 1, etc.</l>
<l>772-795. Pope Hadrian I., § 82, 2.</l>
<l>772. Destruction of Eresburg, § 78, 9.</l>
<l>774. Charlemagne's donation to the Chair of St. Peter, § 82, 2.</l>
<l>785. Wittekind and Alboin are baptized, § 78, 9.</l>
<l>787. Seventh Œcumenical Council at Nicæa, § 66, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Cloister and Cathedral Schools, § 90, 1.</l>
<l>790. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Libri Carolini</foreign>, § 92, 1.</l>
<l>792. Synod at Regensburg, § 91, 1.</l>
<l>794. General Synod at Frankfort, § 91, 1; 92, 1.</l>
<l>795-816. Leo III., Pope, § 82, 3.</l>
<l>799. Alcuin's disputation with Felix at Aachen, § 91, 1.</l>
<l>800. Leo III. crowns Charlemagne, § 82, 3.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Ninth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>804. End of the Saxon War, § 78, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Alcuin dies, § 90, 3.</l>
<l>809. Council at Aachen, on the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Filioque</foreign>, § 91, 2.</l>
<l>813-820. Leo the Armenian, Emperor, § 66, 4.</l>
<l>814-840. Louis the Pious, § 82, 4.</l>
<l>817. Reformation of Monasticism by Benedict of Aniane, § 85, 2.</l>
<l>820-829. Michael Balbus, Emperor, § 66, 4.</l>
<l>825. Synod at Paris against Image Worship, § 92, 1.</l>
<l>826. Theodorus Studita dies, § 66, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Ansgar in Denmark, § 80, 1.</l>
<pb n='465'/><anchor id='Pg465'/>
<l>827. Establishment of Saracen Sovereignty in Sicily, § 81.</l>
<l>829-842. Theophilus, Emperor, § 66, 4.</l>
<l>833. Founding of the Archbishopric of Hamburg, § 80, 1.</l>
<l>835. Synod at Didenhofen, § 82, 4.</l>
<l>839. Claudius of Turin dies. Agobard of Lyons dies, § 90, 4.</l>
<l>840-877. Charles the Bald, § 90, 1.</l>
<l>842. Feast of Orthodoxy, § 66, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Theodora recommends the out-rooting of the Paulicians, § 71, 1.</l>
<l>843. Compact of Verdun, § 82, 5.</l>
<l>844. Eucharist Controversy of Paschasius Radbertus, § 91, 3.</l>
<l>845-882. Hincmar of Rheims, § 83, 2; 90, 5.</l>
<l>847. Archbishopric of Hamburg-Bremen, § 80, 1.</l>
<l>848. Synod of Mainz against Gottschalk, § 91, 5.</l>
<l>850-859. Persecution of Christians in Spain, § 81, 1.</l>
<l>851-852. The Decretals of the Pseudo-Isidore, § 87, 2, 3.</l>
<l>853. Synod of Quiersy. <foreign rend='italic'>Capitula Carisiaca</foreign>, § 91, 5.</l>
<l>855. Synod at Valence in favour of Gottschalk, § 91, 5.</l>
<l>856. Rabanus Maurus dies, § 90, 4.</l>
<l>858-867. Pope Nicholas I., § 82, 7.</l>
<l>858. Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople, § 67, 1.</l>
<l>859. Synod of Savonnières, § 91, 5.</l>
<l>861. Methodius goes to the Bulgarians, § 73, 3.</l>
<l>863. Cyril and Methodius go to Moravia, § 79, 2.</l>
<l>865. Ansgar dies, § 80, 1.</l>
<l>866. Encyclical of Photius, § 67, 1.</l>
<l>867-886. Basil the Macedonian, Emperor, § 67, 1.</l>
<l>867-872. Hadrian II., Pope, § 82, 7.</l>
<l>869. Eighth Œcumenical Council of the Latins at Constantinople § 67, 1.</l>
<l>870. Treaty of Mersen, § 82, 5.</l>
<l>871. Basil the Macedonian puts down the Paulicians, § 71, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Borziwoi and Ludmilla baptized, § 79, 3.</l>
<l>871-901. Alfred the Great, § 90, 9.</l>
<l>875. John VIII. crowns Charles the Bald Emperor, § 82, 8.</l>
<l>879. Eighth Œcumenical Council of the Greeks at Constantinople, § 67, 1.</l>
<l>886-911. Leo the Philosopher, Emperor, § 67, 2.</l>
<l>891. Photius dies, § 67, 1.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Tenth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>910. Abbot Berno founds Clugny, § 98, 1.</l>
<l>911. The German Carolingians die out, § 82, 8.</l>
<l>911-918. Conrad I., King of the Germans. § 96, 1.</l>
<pb n='466'/><anchor id='Pg466'/>
<l>914-928. Pope John X., § 96, 1.</l>
<l>919-936. Henry I., King of the Germans, § 96, 1.</l>
<l>934. Henry I. enforced toleration of Christianity in Denmark, § 93, 2.</l>
<l>936-973. Otto I., Emperor, § 96, 1.</l>
<l>942. Odo of Clugny founds the Clugniac Congregation, § 98, 1.</l>
<l>950. Gylas of Hungary baptized, § 93, 8.</l>
<l>955. Olga baptized in Constantinople, § 73, 4.</l>
<l>960. Atto of Vercelli dies, § 100, 3.</l>
<l>962. Founding of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation, § 96, 1.</l>
<l>963. Synod at Rome deposes John XII., § 96, 1.</l>
<l>966. Miecislaw of Poland baptized, § 93, 7.</l>
<l>968. Founding of Archbishopric of Magdeburg, § 93, 9.</l>
<l>970. Migration of Paulicians to Thrace, § 71, 1.</l>
<l>973-983. Otto II., Emperor, § 96, 2.</l>
<l>974. Ratherius of Verona dies, § 100, 3.</l>
<l>983-1002. Otto III., Emperor, § 96, 2, 3.</l>
<l>983. Mistewoi destroys all Christian establishments among the Wends, § 93, 9.</l>
<l>987. Hugh Capet is made King of France, § 96, 2.</l>
<l>988. Wladimir Christianizes Russia, § 73, 4.</l>
<l>992-1025. Boleslaw Chrobry of Poland, § 93, 7.</l>
<l>996-999. Pope Gregory V., § 96, 2.</l>
<l>997-1038. Stephen the Saint, § 93, 8.</l>
<l>997. Adalbert of Prague, Apostle of Prussia, dies, § 93, 13.</l>
<l>999-1003. Pope Sylvester II., § 96, 3.</l>
<l>1000. Olaf Tryggvason dies, § 93, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Christianity introduced into Iceland and Greenland, § 93, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Stephen of Hungary secures the throne, § 93, 8.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Eleventh Century</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1002-1024. Henry II., Emperor, § 96, 4.</l>
<l>1008. Olaf Skautkoning of Sweden baptized, § 93, 3.</l>
<l>1009. Bruno martyred, § 93, 13.</l>
<l>1012-1024. Pope Benedict VIII., § 96, 4.</l>
<l>1014-1036. Canute the Great, § 93, 2.</l>
<l>1018. Romuald founds the Camaldulensian Congregation, § 98, 1.</l>
<l>1024-1039. Conrad II., Emperor, § 96, 4.</l>
<l>1030. Olaf the Thick of Norway dies, § 93, 4.</l>
<l>1031. Overthrow of the Ommaides in Spain, § 95, 2.</l>
<pb n='467'/><anchor id='Pg467'/>
<l>1039-1056. Henry II., Emperor, § 96, 4, 5.</l>
<l>1041. Treuga Dei, § 105, 1.</l>
<l>1046. Synod at Sutri, § 96, 4.</l>
<l>1049-1054. Pope Leo IX., § 96, 5.</l>
<l>1050. Synods at Rome and Vercelli against Berengar, § 101, 2.</l>
<l>1053. Epistle of Michael Cærularius, § 67, 3.</l>
<l>1054. Excommunication of Greek Church by Papal Legates, § 67, 3.</l>
<l>1056-1106. Henry IV., Emperor, § 96, 6-11.</l>
<l>1059. Pope Nicholas II. assigns the choice of Pope to the College of Cardinals, § 96, 6.</l>
<l>1060. Robert Guiscard founds the Norman Sovereignty in Italy, § 95, 1.</l>
<l>1066. Murder of Gottschalk, King of the Wends, § 93, 9.</l>
<l>1073-1085. Pope Gregory VII., § 96, 7-9.</l>
<l>1075. Gregory's third Investiture Enactment, § 96, 7.</l>
<l>1077. Henry IV. as a Penitent at Canossa, § 96, 8.</l>
<l>1079. Berengar subscribes at Rome the doctrine of Transubstantiation, § 101, 2.</l>
<l>1086. Bruno of Cologne founds the Carthusian Order, § 98, 2.</l>
<l>1088-1099. Pope Urban II., § 96, 10.</l>
<l>1095. Synod at Clermont, § 94.</l>
<l>1096. First Crusade. Godfrey of Boulogne, § 94, 1.</l>
<l>1098. Synod at Bari. Anselm of Canterbury, § 67, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Robert of Citeaux founds the Cistercian Order, § 98, 1.</l>
<l>1099. Conquest of Jerusalem, § 94, 1.</l>
<l>1099-1118. Pope Paschalis II., § 96, 11.</l>

</lg>

<p>
<emph>Twelfth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1106-1125. Henry V., Emperor, § 96, 11.</l>
<l>1106. Michael Psellus dies, § 68, 5.</l>
<l>1109. Anselm of Canterbury dies, § 101, 1, 3.</l>
<l>1113. Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux, § 98, 1; 102, 3.</l>
<l>1118. Founding of the Order of Knights Templar. Knights of St. John, § 98, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Basil, head of Bogomili, sent to the stake, § 71, 4.</l>
<l>1119-1124. Calixtus II., Pope, § 96, 11.</l>
<l>1121. Norbert founds the Præmonstratensian Order, § 98, 2.</l>
<l>1122. Concordat of Worms, § 96, 11.</l>
<l>1123. Ninth Œcumenical Council (First Lateran), § 96, 11.</l>
<l>1124. First Missionary Journey of Otto of Bamberg, § 93, 10.</l>
<l>1126. Peter of Bruys burnt, § 108, 7.</l>
<pb n='468'/><anchor id='Pg468'/>
<l>1128. Second Missionary Journey of Otto of Bamberg, § 93, 10.</l>
<l>1130-1143. Pope Innocent II., § 96, 13.</l>
<l>1135. Rupert of Deutz dies, § 102, 8.</l>
<l>1139. Tenth Œcumenical Council (Second Lateran), § 96, 13.</l>
<l>1141. Synod at Sens condemns Abælard's writings, § 102, 2</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Hugo St. Victor dies, § 102, 4.</l>
<l>1142. Abælard dies, § 102, 2.</l>
<l>1143. Founding of the Roman Commune, § 96, 13.</l>
<l>1145-1153. Pope Eugenius III., § 96, 13.</l>
<l>1146. Fall of Edessa, § 94, 2.</l>
<l>1147. Second Crusade. Conrad III. Louis VII., § 94, 2.</l>
<l>1149. Henry of Lausanne dies, § 108, 7.</l>
<l>1150. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Decretum Gratiani</foreign>, § 99, 5.</l>
<l>1152-1190. Frederick I., Barbarossa, § 96, 14.</l>
<l>1153. Bernard of Clairvaux dies, § 102, 3.</l>
<l>1154. Vicelin dies, § 93, 9.</l>
<l>1154-1159. Hadrian IV., Pope, § 96, 14.</l>
<l>1155. Arnold of Brescia put to death, § 96, 14.</l>
<l>1156. Peter the Venerable dies, § 98, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Carmelite Order, § 98, 3.</l>
<l>1157. Introduction of Christianity into Finland, § 93, 11.</l>
<l>1159-1181. Pope Alexander III., § 96, 15, 16.</l>
<l>1164. Peter the Lombard dies, § 102, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Council of Clarendon, § 96, 16.</l>
<l>1167. Council at Toulouse (Cathari), § 108, 2.</l>
<l>1168. Christianity of the Island of Rügen, § 93, 10.</l>
<l>1169. Gerhoch of Reichersberg dies, § 102, 6, 7.</l>
<l>1170. Thomas Becket murdered, § 96, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of the Waldensian sect, § 108, 10.</l>
<l>1176. Battle of Legnano, § 6, 15.</l>
<l>1179. Eleventh Œcumenical Council (Third Lateran), § 96, 15.</l>
<l>1180. John of Salisbury dies, § 102, 9.</l>
<l>1182. Maronites are attached to Rome, § 73, 3.</l>
<l>1184. Meinhart in Livonia, § 93, 12.</l>
<l>1187. Saladin conquers Jerusalem, § 94, 3.</l>
<l>1189. Third Crusade. Frederick Barbarossa, § 94, 3.</l>
<l>1190-1197. Henry VI., Emperor, § 96, 16.</l>
<l>1190. Founding of Order of Teutonic Knights, § 98, 8.</l>
<l>1194. Eustathius of Thessalonica dies, § 68, 5.</l>
<l>1198-1216. Pope Innocent III., § 96, 17, 18.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='469'/><anchor id='Pg469'/>

<p>
<emph>Thirteenth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1202. Joachim of Floris dies, § 108, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Order of the Brothers of the Sword, § 93, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Genghis Khan destroys Kingdom of Prester John, § 72, 1.</l>
<l>1204-1261. Latin Empire in Constantinople, § 94, 4.</l>
<l>1207. Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury, § 96, 18.</l>
<l>1208. Peter of Castelnau slain, § 109, 1.</l>
<l>1209-1229. Albigensian Crusade, § 109, 1.</l>
<l>1209. Council of Paris against Sect of Amalrich of Bena, § 108, 4.</l>
<l>1212. Battle at Tolosa, § 95, 2.</l>
<l>1213. John Lackland receives England as a Papal Fief, § 96, 18.</l>
<l>1215-1250. Frederick II., Emperor, § 96, 17, 19, 20.</l>
<l>1215. Twelfth Œcumenical Council (Fourth Lateran), § 96, 18.</l>
<l>1216. Confirmation of the Dominican Order, § 98, 5.</l>
<l>1216-1227. Pope Honorius III., § 96, 19.</l>
<l>1217. Fourth Crusade. Andrew II. of Hungary, § 94, 4.</l>
<l>1223. Confirmation of Franciscan Order, § 98, 3.</l>
<l>1226. Francis of Assisi dies, § 98, 3.</l>
<l>1226-1270. Louis IX., the Saint, § 94, 6; 93, 15.</l>
<l>1227-1241. Pope Gregory IX., § 96, 19.</l>
<l>1228. Fifth Crusade. Frederick II., § 94, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Settlement of the Teutonic Knights in Prussia, § 93, 13.</l>
<l>1229. Synod at Toulouse, § 109, 2.</l>
<l>1231. St. Elizabeth dies, § 105, 3.</l>
<l>1232. Inquisition Tribunal set up, § 109, 2.</l>
<l>1233. Conrad of Marburg slain, § 109, 3.</l>
<l>1234. Crusade against Stedingers, § 109, 3.</l>
<l>1237. Union of the Order of Sword with that of Teutonic Knights, § 98, 8.</l>
<l>1243-1254. Pope Innocent IV., § 96, 20.</l>
<l>1245. Thirteenth Œcumenical Council (first of Lyons), § 96, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Alexander of Hales died, § 103, 4.</l>
<l>1248. Foundation stone of Cathedral of Cologne laid, § 101, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Sixth Crusade, Louis IX., § 94, 6.</l>
<l>1253. Robert Grosseteste dies, § 103, 1.</l>
<l>1254. Condemnation of the <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Introductorius in evangelium æternum</foreign>,</q> § 108, 5.</l>
<l>1260. First Flagellant Campaign in Perugia, § 107, 1.</l>
<l>1260-1282. Michael Paläologus, Emperor, § 67, 4.</l>
<l>1261-1264. Urban IV., Pope, § 96, 20.</l>
<l>1262. Arsenian Schism, § 70, 1.</l>
<l>1268. Conradin on the Scaffold. § 96, 20.</l>
<pb n='470'/><anchor id='Pg470'/>
<l>1269. Pragmatic Sanction of Louis IX., § 96, 21.</l>
<l>1270. Seventh Crusade, Louis IX., § 94, 6.</l>
<l>1271-1276. Pope Gregory X., § 96, 21.</l>
<l>1272. Italian Mission to the Mongols. Marco Polo, § 93, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>David of Augsburg dies, § 103, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Bertholdt of Regensburg dies, § 104, 1.</l>
<l>1273-1291. Rudolph of Hapsburg, Emperor, § 96, 21, 22.</l>
<l>1274. Fourteenth Œcumenical Council (second of Lyons), § 96, 21.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Thomas Aquinas dies, § 103, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Bonaventura dies, § 103, 4.</l>
<l>1275. Strassburg Minster, § 104, 13.</l>
<l>1280. Albert the Great dies, § 103, 5.</l>
<l>1282. Sicilian Vespers, § 96, 22.</l>
<l>1283. Prussia subdued, § 93, 13.</l>
<l>1286. Barhabraeus dies, § 72, 2.</l>
<l>1291. Fall of Acre, § 94, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>John of Montecorvino among the Mongols, § 93, 16.</l>
<l>1294. Roger Bacon dies, § 103, 8.</l>
<l>1294-1303. Boniface VIII., Pope, § 110, 1.</l>
<l>1296. Bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Clericis laicos</foreign>, § 110, 1.</l>
<l>1300. First Roman Jubilee, § 117.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Lollards at Antwerp, § 116, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Gerhard Segarelli burnt, § 108, 8.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Fourteenth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1302. Bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</foreign>, § 110, 1.</l>
<l>1305-1314. Pope Clement V., § 110, 2.</l>
<l>1307. Dolcino burnt, § 108, 4.</l>
<l>1308. Duns Scotus dies, § 113, 1.</l>
<l>1309-1377. Residence of Popes at Avignon, § 110, 2-4.</l>
<l>1311-1312. Fifteenth Œcumenical Council at Vienne, § 110, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Suppression of Templar Order, § 112, 7.</l>
<l>1314-1347. Louis the Bavarian, Emperor, § 110, 3, 4.</l>
<l>1315. Raimund Lullus dies, § 93, 17; 103, 5.</l>
<l>1316-1334. Pope John XXII., § 110, 3; 112, 2.</l>
<l>1321. Dante dies, § 116, 6.</l>
<l>1322. Split in the Franciscan Order, § 112, 2.</l>
<l>1327. Meister Eckhart dies, § 114, 1.</l>
<l>1334-1342. Pope Benedict XII., § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1335. Bishop Hemming in Lapland, § 93, 11.</l>
<l>1338. Electoral Union at Rhense, § 110, 5.</l>
<l>1339. Union negotiations at Avignon. Barlaam, § 67, 5.</l>
<l>1340. Nicholas of Lyra dies, § 113, 7.</l>
<l>1341-1351. Hesychast Controversy in Constantinople, § 69, 1.</l>
<pb n='471'/><anchor id='Pg471'/>
<l>1342-1352. Pope Clement VI., § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1346-1378. Charles IV., Emperor, § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1347. Rienzi, § 110, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Emperor Louis dies, § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1348. Founding of University of Prague, § 119, 3.</l>
<l>1348-1350. Black Death. Flagellant Campaign, § 116, 3.</l>
<l>1349. Thomas Bradwardine dies, § 113, 2.</l>
<l>1352-1362. Pope Innocent VI., § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1356. Charles IV. issues the Golden Bull, § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1360. Wiclif against the Begging Friars, § 119, 1.</l>
<l>1361. John Tauler dies, § 114, 2.</l>
<l>1362-1370. Pope Urban V., § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1366. Henry Suso dies, § 114, 5.</l>
<l>1367-1370. Urban V. in Rome, § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1369. John Paläologus passes over to the Latin Church, § 67, 5.</l>
<l>1370-1378. Pope Gregory XI., § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1374. Dancers, § 116, 3.</l>
<l>1377. Return of the Curia to Rome, § 110, 4.</l>
<l>1378-1417. Papal Schism, § 110, 6.</l>
<l>1380. Catharine of Siena dies, § 112, 4.</l>
<l>1384. Wiclif dies, § 119, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Gerhard Groot dies, § 112, 9.</l>
<l>1386. Introduction of Christianity into Lithuania, § 93, 14.</l>
<l>1400. Florentius Radewin dies, § 112, 9.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Fifteenth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1402. Hus becomes Preacher in the Bethlehem Chapel, § 119, 3.</l>
<l>1409. Œcumenical Council at Pisa, § 110, 6.<note place='foot'>From the fifteenth century the numbering of the General Councils
is so variable and uncertain that even Catholic historians are not
agreed upon this point. They are at one only about this, that the
anti-papal councils claiming to be œcumenical, of Pisa <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1409,
Basel <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1438, and Pisa <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1511, should be designated schismatical
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Conciliabula</foreign>.</q> Hefele, in his <q>History of the Councils,</q> counts
eighteen down to the Reformation. He makes the Constance Council
in its first and last sessions the sixteenth, but does not count the
middle session held without the pope. He makes that of Basel the
seventeenth down to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1438 with its papal continuation at Ferrara
and Florence. Finally, as eighteenth he gives the fifth Lateran
Council of <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1512-1517. But others strike Basel and Constance out
of the list altogether; and many, especially the Gallicans, reject also
the fifth Lateran Council, because occupied with matters of slight or
merely local interest.</note></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Withdrawal of the Germans from Prague, § 119, 3.</l>
<pb n='472'/><anchor id='Pg472'/>
<l>1410-1415. John XXIII., Pope, § 110, 7.</l>
<l>1410-1437. Sigismund, Emperor, § 110, 7, 8.</l>
<l>1412. Traffic in Indulgences in Bohemia, § 119, 4.</l>
<l>1413. Papal Ban against Hus, § 119, 4.</l>
<l>1414-1418. Sixteenth Œcumenical Council at Constance, § 110, 6; 119, 5.</l>
<l>1415. Hus obtains the crown of martyrdom, § 119, 5.</l>
<l>1416. Jerome of Prague martyred, § 119, 5.</l>
<l>1417-1431. Pope Martin V., § 110, 7.</l>
<l>1420. Calixtines and Taborites, § 119, 7.</l>
<l>1423. General Councils at Pavia and Siena, § 110, 7.</l>
<l>1424. Ziska dies, § 119, 7.</l>
<l>1425. Peter D'Ailly dies, § 118, 3.</l>
<l>1429. Gerson dies, § 118, 3.</l>
<l>1431-1447. Pope Eugenius IV., § 110, 7.</l>
<l>1431-1449. Seventeenth Œcumenical Council at Basel, § 110, 8; 119, 5-7.</l>
<l>1433. Basel Compacts, § 119, 7.</l>
<l>1434. Overthrow of Hussites at Böhmischbrod, § 119, 7.</l>
<l>1438. Papal Counter-Council at Ferrara, § 110, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges, § 110, 9.</l>
<l>1439. Council at Florence, § 67, 6.</l>
<l>1448. Concordat of Vienna, § 110, 9.</l>
<l>1453. Fall of Constantinople, § 67, 6.</l>
<l>1457. Laurentius Valla dies, § 120, 1.</l>
<l>1458-1464. Pope Pius II., § 110, 11.</l>
<l>1459. Congress of Princes at Mantua, § 110, 10.</l>
<l>1464-1471. Pope Paul II., § 110, 11.</l>
<l>1467. Convention of Bohemian Brethren at Lhota, § 119, 8.</l>
<l>1471. Thomas à Kempis dies, § 114, 5.</l>
<l>1471-1484. Sixtus IV., Pope, § 110, 11.</l>
<l>1483. Luther born on November 10th, § 122, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Spanish Inquisition, § 117, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Close of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Corpus juris canonici</foreign>, § 99, 5.</l>
<l>1484-1492. Innocent VIII., Pope, § 110, 11.</l>
<l>1484. Zwingli born January 1st, § 130, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Bull <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Summis desiderantes</foreign>, § 117, 4.</l>
<l>1485. Rudolph Agricola dies, § 120, 3.</l>
<l>1489. John Wessel dies, § 119, 10.</l>
<l>1492-1503. Alexander VI., Pope, § 110, 12.</l>
<l>1492. Fall of Granada, § 95, 2.</l>
<l>1493-1519. Maximilian I., Emperor, § 110, 13.</l>
<l>1497. Melanchthon born, § 122, 5.</l>
<l>1498. Savonarola sent to the stake, § 119, 11.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='473'/><anchor id='Pg473'/>

<p>
<emph>Sixteenth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1502. Founding of University of Wittenberg, § 122, 1.</l>
<l>1508-1513. Pope Julius II., § 110, 13.</l>
<l>1506. Rebuilding of St. Peter's at Rome, § 115, 13.</l>
<l>1508. Luther becomes Professor at Wittenberg, § 122, 1.</l>
<l>1509. Calvin born on July 10th, § 138, 2.</l>
<l>1509-1547. Henry VIII. of England, § 139, 4.</l>
<l>1511. Luther's journey to Rome, § 122, 1. Council at Pisa, § 110, 13.</l>
<l>1512. Luther made Doctor of the Holy Scriptures and Preacher, § 112, 1.</l>
<l>1512-1517. Fifth Lateran Council, § 110, 13, 14.</l>
<l>1513-1521. Pope Leo X., § 110, 14.</l>
<l>1514. Reuchlin's contest with the Dominicans, § 120, 4.</l>
<l>1516. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Epistolæ Obscur. virorum</foreign>, § 120, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Erasmus edits the New Testament, § 120, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Zwingli preaches at Mariä Einsiedeln, § 130, 1.</l>
<l>1517. Luther's Theses, October 31st, § 122, 2.</l>
<l>1518. Luther at Heidelberg and before Cajetan at Augsburg, § 122, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Melanchthon Professor at Wittenberg, § 122, 5.</l>
<l>1519. Miltitz, § 122, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Disputation at Leipzig, § 122, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Zwingli in Zürich, § 130, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Olaf and Laurence Peterson in Sweden, § 139, 1.</l>
<l>1519-1556. Emperor Charles V., § 123, 5.</l>
<l>1520. Bull of Excommunication against Luther, § 123, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Christian II. in Denmark, § 139, 2.</l>
<l>1521. Luther at Worms, § 123, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Melanchthon's <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Loci</foreign>, § 121, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Beginning of Reformation in Riga, § 139, 3.</l>
<l>1521-1522. The Wartburg Exile, § 123, 8.</l>
<l>1522. The Prophets of Zwickau in Wittenberg, § 124, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Reuchlin dies, § 120, 4.</l>
<l>1522-1523. Pope Hadrian VI., § 126, 1.</l>
<l>1523. Thomas Münzer in Allstädt, § 124, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Luther's contest with Henry VIII., § 125, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>First Martyrs, Voes and Esch, § 128, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Sickingen's defeat, § 124, 2.</l>
<l>1523-1534. Pope Clement VII., § 149, 1.</l>
<l>1524. Staupitz dies, § 112, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Carlstadt in Orlamünde, § 124, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Erasmus against Luther, § 125, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Diet of Nuremberg, § 126, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Regensburg League, § 126, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Hans Tausen in Denmark, § 139, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Theatine Order, § 149, 7.</l>
<l>1525. Eucharist Controversy, § 131, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Luther's Marriage, § 129.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Albert of Prussia, Hereditary Duke, § 126, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of the Capuchin Order, § 149, 7.</l>
<pb n='474'/><anchor id='Pg474'/>
<l>1525-1532. John the Constant, Elector of Saxony, § 124, 5.</l>
<l>1526. Synod at Hamburg, § 127, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Torgau League, § 126, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Diet at Spires, § 126, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Disputation at Baden, § 130, 6.</l>
<l>1527. Diet at Odense, § 139, 2; and at Westeräs, § 139, 1.</l>
<l>1528. The Pack incident, § 132, 1. Disputation at Bern, § 130, 7.</l>
<l>1529. Church Visitation of Saxony, § 127, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Diet at Spires, § 132, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Marburg Conference, § 132, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>First Peace of Cappel, § 130, 9.</l>
<l>1530. Diet at Augsburg. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Conf. Augustana</foreign>, June 25th, § 132, 6, 7.</l>
<l>1531. Schmalcald League, § 133, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Zwingli dies. Second Peace of Cappel, § 130, 10.</l>
<l>1532-1547. John Frederick the Magnanimous, Elector of Saxony, § 133, 2.</l>
<l>1532. Religious Peace of Nuremberg, § 133, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Farel at Geneva, § 138, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Henry VIII. renounces authority of the Pope, § 139, 4.</l>
<l>1534. Luther's complete Bible Translation, § 129, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Reformation in Württemberg, § 133, 3.</l>
<l>1534-1535. Anabaptist Troubles in Münster, § 133, 6.</l>
<l>1534-1549. Pope Paul III., § 149, 2.</l>
<l>1535. Vergerius in Wittenberg, § 134, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Calvin's <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Institutio rel. Christ.</foreign>, § 138, 5.</l>
<l>1536. Erasmus dies, § 120, 6. Wittenberg Concord, § 133, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Calvin in Geneva, § 138, 2. Diet at Copenhagen, § 139, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Menno Simons baptized, § 147, 1.</l>
<l>1537. Schmalcald Articles, § 134, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Antinomian Controversy, § 141, 1.</l>
<l>1538. Nuremberg League, § 134, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Calvin Expelled from Geneva, § 138, 3.</l>
<l>1539. Outbreak at Frankfort, § 134, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Reformation in Albertine Saxony, § 134, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Joachim II. reforms Brandenburg, § 134, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Diet at Odense, § 139, 2.</l>
<l>1540. The Society of Jesus, § 149, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Double Marriage of the Landgrave, § 135, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Religious Conferences at Spires, Hagenau, and Worms, § 135, 2.</l>
<l>1541. Carlstadt dies, § 124, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Interim of Regensburg, § 135, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Naumburg Episcopate, § 135, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Calvin returns to Geneva, § 138, 3, 4.</l>
<l>1542. Reformation in Brunswick, § 135, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>National Assembly at Bonn, § 135, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Francis Xavier in the East Indies, § 150, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Roman Inquisition, § 139, 23.</l>
<l>1544. Diet at Spires, Peace of Crespy, Wittenberg Reformation, § 135, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Diet at Westeräs, § 139, 1.</l>
<pb n='475'/><anchor id='Pg475'/>
<l>1545. Synod at Erdöd, § 139, 20.</l>
<l>1545-1547. Nineteenth Œcumenical Council at Trent, § 136, 4; 149, 2.</l>
<l>1546. Regensburg Conference: Murder of John Diaz, § 135, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Luther dies, February 18th, § 135, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Reformation in the Palatinate, § 135, 6.</l>
<l>1546-1547. Schmalcald War, § 136.</l>
<l>1547-1553. Edward VI. of England, § 139, 5.</l>
<l>1547. Hermann of Cologne resigns, § 136, 2.</l>
<l>1548-1572. Sigismund Augustus, of Poland, § 139, 18.</l>
<l>1548. Interim of Augsburg, § 136, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Adiaphorist Controversy, § 141, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Priests of the Oratory, § 149, 7.</l>
<l>1549. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Consensus Tigurinus</foreign>, § 138, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Andrew Osiander at Königsburg, § 141, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Jesuit Mission in Brazil, § 150, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The first Jesuits in Germany (Ingolstadt), § 151, 2.</l>
<l>1550-1555. Pope Julius III., § 136, 8.</l>
<l>1550. Brothers of Mercy, § 149, 7.</l>
<l>1551. Resumption of Tridentine Council, § 136, 8; 149, 2.</l>
<l>1552. Compact of Passau, § 137, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Outbreak of Crypto-Calvinist Controversy, § 141, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Francis Xavier dies, § 150, 1.</l>
<l>1553-1558. Mary the Catholic of England, § 139, 5.</l>
<l>1553. Elector Maurice dies, § 137, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Servetus burnt, § 148, 2.</l>
<l>1554. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Consensus Pastorum Genevensium</foreign>, § 138, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>John Frederick the Magnanimous dies, § 137, 3.</l>
<l>1555. Religious Peace of Augsburg, § 137, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Outbreak of Synergist Controversies, § 141, 7.</l>
<l>1555-1598. Philip II. of Spain, § 139, 21.</l>
<l>1556-1564. Ferdinand I, Emperor, § 137, 8.</l>
<l>1556. Loyola dies, § 149, 8.</l>
<l>1557. National Assembly at Clausenburg and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Hungarica</foreign>, § 139, 20.</l>
<l>1558. Frankfort Recess, § 141, 11.</l>
<l>1558-1603. Elizabeth of England, § 139, 6.</l>
<l>1559. Gustavus Vasa's Mission to the Lapps, § 142, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Gallicana</foreign>, § 139, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The English Act of Uniformity, § 139, 6.</l>
<l>1560-1565. Pope Pius IV., § 149, 2.</l>
<l>1560. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Scotica</foreign>, § 139, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>John a Lasco dies, § 139, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Calvinizing of the Palatinate, § 144, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Melanchthon dies, § 141, 10.</l>
<l>1561. Gotthard Kettler, Duke of Courland, § 139, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Religious Conference at Poissy, § 139, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Mary Stuart in Scotland, § 139, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Princes' Diet at Naumburg, § 141, 11.</l>
<l>1562-1563. Resumption and Close of Tridentine Council, § 149, 2.</l>
<pb n='476'/><anchor id='Pg476'/>
<l>1562. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Belgica</foreign>, § 139, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The XXXIX. Articles of the English Church, § 139, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Calvinizing of Bremen, § 144, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Heidelberg Catechism, § 144, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Lælius Socinus dies, § 148, 4.</l>
<l>1564. Calvin dies, § 138, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Professio fidei Tridentinæ</foreign>, § 149, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Cassander's Union Proposals, § 137, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Maulbronn Convention, § 144, 1.</l>
<l>1564-1576. Emperor Maximilian II., § 137, 8.</l>
<l>1566. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Catechasimo Romanus</foreign>, § 149, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Helvetica posterior</foreign>, § 138, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The League of <q>the Beggars,</q> § 139, 12.</l>
<l>1567. The writings of Michael Baius condemned, § 149, 13.</l>
<l>1570. General Synod at Sendomir, § 139, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Peace of St. Germains, § 139, 15.</l>
<l>1572-1585. Pope Gregory XIII., § 149, 3.</l>
<l>1572. John Knox dies, § 139, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Bloody Marriage of Paris, August 24th, § 139, 16.</l>
<l>1573. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pax dissidentium</foreign> in Poland, § 139, 18.</l>
<l>1574. Maulbronn Convention, § 141, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Restoration of Catholicism in Eichsfelde, § 151, 1.</l>
<l>1575. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Bohemica</foreign>, § 139, 19.</l>
<l>1576. Book of Torgau, § 141, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Pacification of Ghent, § 139, 12.</l>
<l>1576-1612. Rudolph II., Emperor, § 137, 8.</l>
<l>1577. The Formula of Concord, § 141, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Restoration of Catholicism in Fulda, § 151, 1.</l>
<l>1578. The Jesuit Possevin in Sweden, § 151, 3.</l>
<l>1579. The Union of Utrecht, § 139, 12.</l>
<l>1580. Book of Concord, § 141, 12.</l>
<l>1582. Second Attempt at Reformation in Cologne, § 137, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Matthew Ricci in China, § 150, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Reform of Calendar, § 149, 3.</l>
<l>1585-1590. Pope Sixtus V., § 149, 3.</l>
<l>1587. Mary Stuart on the Scaffold, § 139, 10.</l>
<l>1588. Louis Molina, § 149, 13.</l>
<l>1589-1610. Henry IV. of France, § 139, 17.</l>
<l>1589. Patriarchate at Moscow, § 73, 4.</l>
<l>1592. Saxon Articles of Visitation, § 141, 13.</l>
<l>1593. Assembly of Representatives at Upsala, § 139, 1.</l>
<l>1595. Synod at Thorn, § 139, 18.</l>
<l>1596. Synod at Brest, § 151, 3.</l>
<l>1597. Calvinizing the Principality of Anhalt, § 144, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Congregatio de auxiliis</foreign>, § 149, 13.</l>
<l>1598. Edict of Nantes, § 139, 17.</l>
<l>1600. Giordano Bruno at the Stake, § 146, 3.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='477'/><anchor id='Pg477'/>

<p>
<emph>Seventeenth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1604. Faustus Socinus dies, § 148, 4.</l>
<l>1605. Landgrave Maurice calvinizes Hesse Cassel, § 154, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Gunpowder Plot, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1606. The Treaty of Vienna, § 139, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Interdict on the Republic of Venice, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_2'>156, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1608. Founding the Jesuit State of Paraguay, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_10'>156, 10</ref>.</l>
<l>1609. The Royal Letter, § 193, 19.</l>
<l>1610-1643. Louis XIII. of France, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1610. Remonstrants and Counter-Remonstrants, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>160, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1611. Pères de l'Oratoire, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>.</l>
<l>1612-1619. Matthias, Emperor, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>153, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1613. Elector John Sigismund of Brandenburg goes over to Reformed Church, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>154, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>George Calixtus in Helmstädt, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_2'>159, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1614. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Marchica</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>154, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1616. Leonard Hutter dies, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1618. Monks of St. Maur in France, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>.</l>
<l>1618-1648. The Thirty Years' War, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1618-1619. Synod of Dort, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1619-1637. Ferdinand II., Emperor, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1620. The Valteline Massacre, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The Pilgrim Fathers, § 143, 2.</l>
<l>1621. John Arndt dies, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1622. Francis de Sales dies, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_1'>157, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Congregatio de propaganda fide</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_9'>156, 9</ref>.</l>
<l>1624. End of Controversy over κένωσις and κρύψις, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_1'>159, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Jac. Böhme dies, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>160, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1628. Adam Schall in China, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_12'>156, 12</ref>.</l>
<l>1629. Edict of Restitution, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1631. Religious Conference at Leipzig, § 155, 4.</l>
<l>1632. Gustavus Adolphus falls at Lützen, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1637. John Gerhard dies, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Rooting out of Christianity in Japan, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_11'>156, 11</ref>.</l>
<l>1638. Overthrow of Racovian Seminary, § 148, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Cyril Lucar strangled, § <ref target='Section_152_Para_2'>152, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Scottish Covenant, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1641. Irish Massacre, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_5'>153, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1642. Condemnation of the <q>Augustinus</q> of Jansen, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1643-1715. Louis XIV. of France, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>; 157, <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
<l>1643. Orthodox Confession of Peter Mogilas, § <ref target='Section_152_Para_3'>152, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Opening of Westminster Assembly, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1645. Hugo Grotius dies, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Religious Conference at Thorn, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Peace of Linz, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>.</l>
<pb n='478'/><anchor id='Pg478'/>
<l>1645-1742. Accommodation Controversy, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_12'>156, 12</ref>.</l>
<l>1647. George Fox appears as Leader of the Quakers, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_4'>163, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1648. Peace of Westphalia, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Close of Westminster Assembly, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1649. Execution of Charles I. of England, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1650. Descartes dies, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_1'>164, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1652. Liturgical Reform of the Patriarch Nikon, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>163, 10</ref>.</l>
<l>1653. Innocent X. condemns the Five Propositions of Jansen, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Barebones' Parliament, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_2'>155, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1654. Christina of Sweden becomes a Catholic, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>153, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>John Val. Andreä dies, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1655. The Bloody Easter in Piedmont, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_5'>153, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Consensus repetitus fidei vere Lutheranæ</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_2'>159, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1656. George Calixtus dies, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_2'>159, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Pascal's <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Lettres Provinciales</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1658. Outbreak of Cocceian Controversies, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_5'>161, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1660. Vincent de Paul dies, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Restoration of Royalty and Episcopacy in England, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>155, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1661. Religious Conference at Cassel, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1664. Founding of Order of Trappists, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
<l>1669. Cocceius dies, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1670. The Labadists in Herford, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_7'>163, 7</ref>.</l>
<l>1673. The Test Act, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1675. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Formula consensus Helvetici</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Spener's <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pia Desideria</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1676. Paul Gerhardt dies, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Voetius dies, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1677. Spinoza dies, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_1'>164, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1682. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quatuor propositiones Cleri Gallicani</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>156, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Pennsylvania, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_4'>163, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1685. Revocation of Edict of Nantes and Expulsion of Waldensians from Piedmont, § 153, <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_153_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
<l>1686. Spener at Dresden and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collegia philobiblica</foreign> in Leipzig, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Abraham Calov dies, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1687. Michael Molinos forced to Abjure, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>157, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1689. English Act of Toleration, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>155, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Return of banished Waldensians, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_5'>153, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1690. The Pietists Expelled from Leipzig, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1691. Spener in Berlin, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1694. Founding of University of Halle, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1697. Frederick Augustus the Strong of Saxony becomes Catholic, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>153, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1699. Propositions of Fénelon Condemned, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='479'/><anchor id='Pg479'/>

<p>
<emph>Eighteenth Century.</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1701. Thomas of Tournon in the East Indies, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_12'>156, 12</ref>.</l>
<l>1702. Löscher's <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Unschuldige Nachrichten</foreign>,</q> § <ref target='Section_167_Para_1'>167, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Buttlar Fanatical Excesses, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1703. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collegium caritativum</foreign> at Berlin, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Peter Codde deposed, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_8'>165, 8</ref>.</l>
<l>1704. Bossuet dies, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1705. Spener dies, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1706. Founding of Lutheran Mission at Tranquebar, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
<l>1707. The Praying Children at Silesia, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>167, 8</ref>.</l>
<l>1709. Port Royal suppressed, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1712. Richard Simon dies, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Mechitarist Congregation, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>165, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1713. The Constitution <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unigenitus</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
<l>1717-1774. Louis XV. of France, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_5'>165, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1715. Fénelon dies, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1716. Leibnitz dies, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_2'>164, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1717. French Appellants, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Madame Guyon dies, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Gottfried Arnold dies, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>160, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Inspired Communities in the Cevennes, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_2'>170, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1721. Holy Synod of St. Petersburg, § <ref target='Section_166'>166</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Hans Egede goes as Missionary to Greenland, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
<l>1722. Founding of Herrnhut, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_2'>168, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1727. A. H. Francke dies, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>167, 8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Thomas of Westen dies, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_7'>160, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of the Society of United Brethren, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_2'>168, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1728. Callenberg's Institute for Conversion of Jews, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
<l>1729. Buddeus dies, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_2'>168, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Methodist Society formed, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_4'>169, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1731. Emigration of Evangelicals of Salzburg, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>165, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1740-1786. Frederick II. of Prussia, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>171, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1741. Moravian Special Covenant with the Lord Jesus, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_4'>168, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1750. Sebastian Bach dies, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_7'>167, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>End of Jesuit State of Paraguay, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_3'>165, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1751. Semler, Professor in Halle, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>171, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1752. Bengel dies, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1754. Christ. v. Wolff dies, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>167, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Winckelmann becomes a Roman Catholic, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_6'>165, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1755. Mosheim dies, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>167, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1758-1769. Pope Clement XIII., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
<l>1759. Banishment of Jesuits from Portugal, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
<l>1760. Zinzendorf dies, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_3'>168, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1762. Judicial Murder of Jean Calas, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_5'>165, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1765. Universal German Library, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>171, 4</ref>.</l>
<pb n='480'/><anchor id='Pg480'/>
<l>1769-1774. Pope Clement XIV., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
<l>1772. Swedenborg dies, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_5'>170, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1773. Suppression of Jesuit Order, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
<l>1774. Wolfenbüttel Fragments, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>171, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1775-1799. Pius VI., Pope, § 165, <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>9</ref>, <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>10</ref>.</l>
<l>1775. C. A. Crusius dies, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>167, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1776. Founding of the Order of the Illuminati, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_13'>165, 13</ref>.</l>
<l>1778. Voltaire and Rousseau die, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>165, 14</ref>.</l>
<l>1780-1790. Joseph II., sole ruler, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
<l>1781. Joseph's Edict of Toleration, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
<l>1782. Pope Pius VI. in Vienna, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
<l>1786. Congress at Ems and Synod at Pistoja, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
<l>1787. Edict of Versailles, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>165, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1788. The Religious Edict of Wöllner, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_5'>171, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1789. French Revolution, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
<l>1791. Wesley dies, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_5'>169, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Semler dies, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>171, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1793. Execution of Louis XVI. and his Queen. Abolition of Christian reckoning of time and of the Christian religion in France. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Temple de la Raison</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
<l>1794. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Le peuple français reconnait l'Etre suprème et l'immortalité de l'âme</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
<l>1795. Founding of London Missionary Society, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>172, 5</ref>.</l>
<l>1799. Schleiermacher's <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Reden über die Religion</foreign>,</q> § <ref target='Section_182_Para_1'>182, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1800. Stolberg becomes a Roman Catholic, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_6'>165, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<emph>Nineteenth Century</emph>
</p>

<lg>
<l>1800-1823. Pope Pius VII., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1801. French Concordat, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>203, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1803. Recess of Imperial Deputies, § <ref target='Section_192_Para_1'>192, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1804. Founding of British and Foreign Bible Society, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_4'>183, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Kant dies, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_10'>171, 10</ref>.</l>
<l>1806. End of Catholic German Empire, § <ref target='Section_192'>192</ref>.</l>
<l>1809. Napoleon under Ban; the Pope Imprisoned, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1810. Founding of American Missionary Society at Boston, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>184, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Schleiermacher professor at Berlin, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_1'>182, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1811. French National Council, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1814. Vienna Congress. Restoration of the Pope, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Restoration of the Jesuits, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_1'>186, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1815. The Holy Alliance, § <ref target='Section_173'>173</ref>.</l>
<l>1816. Mission Seminary at Basel, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>184, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1817. The Theses of Harms, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Union Interpellation of Frederick William III., § <ref target='Section_177_Para_1'>177, 1</ref>.</l>
<pb n='481'/><anchor id='Pg481'/>
<l>1822. Introduction of the Prussian Service Book, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Lyons Association for Spreading the Faith, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_7'>186, 7</ref>.</l>
<l>1823-1829. Pope Leo XII., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1825. Book of Mormon, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_12'>211, 12</ref>.</l>
<l>1827. Hengstenberg's <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Evangel. Kirchenzeitung</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1829. English Catholic Emancipation Bill, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_9'>202, 9</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Barmen Missionary Institute, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>184, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1829-1830. Pope Pius VIII., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1830. July Revolution, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_2'>203, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Halle Controversy, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Abbé Chatel in Paris, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_6'>187, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1831-1846. Gregory XVI., Pope, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1831. Hegel dies, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_1'>174, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1833. Beginning of Puseyite Agitation, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_2'>203, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1834. Conflict at Hönigern, § <ref target='Section_177_Para_2'>177, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Schleiermacher dies, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_1'>182, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1835. Strauss' first Life of Jesus, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_6'>182, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Condemnation of Hermesianism, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>193, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Edward Irving dies, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Persecution of Christians in Madagascar, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_3'>184, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1836. Founding of Dresden Missionary Institute, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>184, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1837. Emigrants of Zillerthal, § <ref target='Section_198_Para_1'>198, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Beginning of Troubles at Cologne, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>193, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1838. Archbishop Dunin of Posen, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>193, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Rescript of Altenburg, § <ref target='Section_194_Para_2'>194, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>J. A. Möhler dies, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_4'>191, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>English Tithes' Bill, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_9'>202, 9</ref>.</l>
<l>1839. Call of Dr. Strauss to Zürich, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_4'>199, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Bavarian order to give Adoration, § <ref target='Section_195_Para_2'>195, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Synod at Polozk, § <ref target='Section_206_Para_2'>206, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1810-1861. Frederick William IV. of Prussia, § <ref target='Section_193'>193</ref>.</l>
<l>1841. Schelling at Berlin, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_1'>174, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Constitution of Lutherans separated from National Church of Prussia, § <ref target='Section_177_Para_2'>177, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Evangelical Bishopric of Jerusalem, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_8'>184, 8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Gustavus Adolphus Association, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_1'>178, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1843. Disruption and Founding of the Free Church of Scotland, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_7'>202, 7</ref>.</l>
<l>1844. German-Catholic Church, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_1'>187, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Wislicenus' <q>Ob Schrift, ob Geist?</q> § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1845. Founding Free Church of Vaud, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_2'>199, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1845-1846. Conversions in Livonia, § <ref target='Section_206_Para_3'>206, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1846-1878. Pope Pius IX., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2-4</ref>.</l>
<l>1846. Founding of Evangelical Alliance in London, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_3'>178, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Fruitless Prussian General Synod in Berlin, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_3'>193, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1847. Prussian Patent of Toleration, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_3'>193, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>War of Swiss Sonderbund, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_1'>199, 1</ref>.</l>
<pb n='482'/><anchor id='Pg482'/>
<l>1848. Revolution of February and March, § <ref target='Section_192_Para_4'>192, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Evangel. Kirchentag</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_4'>178, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Catholic <q>Pius Association,</q> § <ref target='Section_186_Para_3'>186, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Bishops' Congress of Würzburg, § <ref target='Section_192_Para_4'>192, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1849. Roman Republic, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>First Congress for Home Missions, § <ref target='Section_183'>183</ref>.</l>
<l>1850. Institution of Berlin <q>Oberkirchenrat,</q> § <ref target='Section_193_Para_4'>193, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Return of Pope to Rome, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>English Ecclesiastical Titles Bill, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_11'>202, 11</ref>.</l>
<l>1851. Memorial of Upper Rhine Bishops, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_1'>196, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Taeping Rebellion in China, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_15'>211, 15</ref>.</l>
<l>1852. Conference at Eisenach, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_2'>178, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1852-1870. Napoleon III., Emperor of the French, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_3'>203, 3</ref>, 5.</l>
<l>1853. The <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kirchentag</foreign> at Berlin acknowledges the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Augustana</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_4'>178, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Missionary Institute at Hermannsburg, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>New Organization of the Catholic Hierarchy in Holland, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_4'>200, 4</ref>.</l>
<l>1855. Sardinian Law about Monasteries, § <ref target='Section_204_Para_1'>204, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Austrian Concordat, § <ref target='Section_198_Para_2'>198, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1857. The Evangelical Alliance in Berlin, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_3'>178, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1858. Disturbances in Baden about Service Book, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_3'>196, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The Mother of God at Lourdes, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_7'>188, 7</ref>.</l>
<l>1859. Franco-Austrian War in Italy, <ref target='Section_204_Para_2'>204, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1860. Persecution of Syrian Christians, § <ref target='Section_207_Para_2'>207, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Abrogation of Baden Concordat, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_2'>196, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1861. The Austrian Patent, § <ref target='Section_198_Para_3'>198, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Introduction of a Constitutional Church Order into Baden, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_3'>196, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Radama II. in Madagascar, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_3'>184, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Schism among Separatist Lutherans in Prussia, § <ref target='Section_177_Para_3'>177, 3</ref>.</l>
<l>1862. Hanoverian Catechism Scandal, § <ref target='Section_194_Para_3'>194, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Renan's Life of Jesus, <ref target='Section_182_Para_8'>182, 8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Württemberg Ecclesiastical Law, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_6'>196, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1863. Congress of Catholic Scholars at Munich, § 190, 10.</l>
<l>1864. Encyclical and Syllabus, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Strauss' and Schenkel's Life of Jesus, § 182, <ref target='Section_182_Para_8'>8</ref>, <ref target='Section_182_Para_17'>17</ref>.</l>
<l>1865. The first <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantentag</foreign> at Eisenach, § 180. 1.</l>
<l>1866. Founding of the North German League.</l>
<l>1867. St. Peter's Centenary Festival at Rome, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1869. Irish Church Bill, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_10'>202, 10</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Opening of Vatican Council, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_2'>189, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1870. Proclamation of Doctrine of Infallibility, July 18th, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Revocation of the Austrian Concordat. § <ref target='Section_198_Para_2'>198, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Overthrow of the Church States, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>185, 3</ref>.</l>
<pb n='483'/><anchor id='Pg483'/>
<l>1871. Founding of the new German Empire, January 18th, § <ref target='Section_197'>197</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The first Old Catholic Congress at Munich, § <ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>190, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><q>The Kanzelparagraph,</q> § <ref target='Section_197_Para_4'>197, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>First Lutheran National Synod in the kingdom of Saxony, § <ref target='Section_194_Para_1'>194, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1872. Dr. Falk, Prussian Minister of Worship, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_5'>193, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The Prussian School Inspection Law, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_3'>199, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The Roman Disputation, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_3'>175, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The German Jesuit Law, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_4'>197, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Epidemic of Manifestations of the Mother of God in Alsace-Lorraine, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_6'>188, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1873. The four Prussian Ecclesiastical Laws, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_5'>197, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Mermillod and Lachat Deposed from office, § 199, <ref target='Section_199_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_199_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Constitution of Old Catholic Church in German Empire, § <ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>190, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1874. The Austrian Ecclesiastical Laws, § <ref target='Section_198_Para_6'>198, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Union Conference at Bonn, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_6'>175, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1875. The Encyclical <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quod numquam</foreign> and the Embargo Act, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_8'>197, 8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Berlin Extraordinary General Synod, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_5'>193, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Pearsall Smith, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_1'>211, 1</ref>.</l>
<l>1876. Marpinger Mother-of-God trick, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_7'>188, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The Dutch University Law, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>202, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1878. Leo XIII. ascends the Papal chair, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_5'>185, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Organization of a Catholic Hierarchy in Scotland, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_11'>202, 11</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Congress of Berlin, § <ref target='Section_207_Para_5'>207, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Amnesty to the recalcitrant Clergy of the Jura, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_3'>199, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>First appearance of the Salvation Army, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_2'>205, 2</ref>.</l>
<l>1879. The Belgian Liberal Education Act, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_6'>200, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1880. Abolition of the <q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kulturexamen</foreign></q> in Baden, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_14'>197, 14</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>French Decree of March, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_6'>203, 6</ref>.</l>
<l>1881. Robertson Smith's Heresy Case, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_8'>202, 8</ref>.</l>
<l>1882. The Confessional Lutheran Conflict with the Ritschlian School, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_21'>182, 21</ref>.</l>
<l>1883. The Luther Jubilee, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_10'>175, 10</ref>.</l>
<l>1884. The Belgian Clerical Education Act, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_6'>200, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Conclusion of the <q>Kulturkampf</q> in Switzerland, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_2'>199, 2</ref>, 3.</l>
<l>1887. Prussian and Hessian Governments conclude Peace with Papal Curia, § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_13'>13</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_15'>15</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Founding of Evangelical <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Bund</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_5'>178, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='485'/><anchor id='Pg485'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Aachen, Council of, § 91, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aargau, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_1'>199, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abælard, § 102, 1, 2; 104, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbacomites, § 85, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbadie, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbate, Abbé, § 111, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbo of Fleury, § 100, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbot, § 44, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abbuna, § 52, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abdas of Susa, § 64, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abdelmoumen, § 95, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abderrhamann, § 81; 95, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abdias, § 32, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abel, von, § <ref target='Section_195_Para_2'>195, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abelites, § 44, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abgar Bar Maanu, § 21.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Edessa, § 13, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>About, E., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>185, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abraham a St. Clara, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abrahamites, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_16'>165, 16</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abrasax, § 27, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abrenunciatio diaboli, § 35; 58, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Absolution, Formula of, § 89, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abstinence, Days of, § 56, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abulfarajus, § 72, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abyssinian Church, § 64, 1; 72, 2; 150, 4; <ref target='Section_152_Para_1'>152, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_160_Para_7'>160, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_166_Para_3'>166, 3</ref>; 187, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acacius of Amida, § 64, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Constantinople, § 52, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acceptants, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Accommodation Controversy, § 155, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>d'Achery, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achterfeld, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_1'>191, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acindynos, § 69, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acoimetæ, § 44, 3; 52, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acolytes, § 34, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acominatus, § 68, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acosta, Uriel, § 155, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Acta facientes</foreign>, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acta Pilati, § 22, 7; 32, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acta Sanctorum, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acton, Lord, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_2'>189, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acts of Apostles, Apocryphal, § 32, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acts of Martyrs, § 32, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adalbert of Bremen, § 96, 6; 97, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Heretic, § 78, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Prague, § 93, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Tuscany, § 96, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adam, Book of, § 32, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adam, St. Victor, § 104, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adamantius (Origen), § 31, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adamites, § 27, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Bohemian, § 116, 5; <ref target='Section_210_Para_2'>210, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adamnan, § 77, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Addai, § 32, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adeodatus, § 47, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adiaphorist Controversy, § 141, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adoptionists, § 91, 1; 102, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adrianus, § 48, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adrumetum, § 53, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Advent, § 56, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adventists, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_11'>211, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='486'/><anchor id='Pg486'/>

<lg>
<l>Advocatus diaboli, § 104, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       ecclesiæ, § 86.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aedesius, § 64, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aelfric, § 100, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aeneas of Gaza, § 47, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Sylvius, <hi rend='italic'>see</hi> <ref target='Index-Pius-II'>Pius II</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aeons, § 26, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aepinus, § 141, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aërius, § 62, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Aeternus ille</foreign>, § 149, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aetius, § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africa, § 76, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africanus, § 31, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agape, § 17, 7; 36, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agapetæ, § 39, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agapetus, § 46, 9; 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agathangelos, § 64, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agatho, § 46, 11; 52, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agenda Controversy in Prussia, § <ref target='Section_177_Para_1'>177, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agenum, Synod of, § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agilulf, § 76, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agnostics, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agobard, § 90, 4, 9; 91, 1; 92, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agreda, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_5'>156, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agricola, John, § 141, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Rudolph, § 120, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agrippa of Nettesheim, § 146, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aguas, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>209, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aguilar, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>209, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aguirre, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahle, Rud., § <ref target='Section_160_Para_5'>160, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aidan, § 77, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>d'Ailly, § 110, 7; 118, 4; 119, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aistulf, § 82, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aizanas, § 64, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἀκέφαλοι, § 52, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἀκρόασις, § 39, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἀκροώμενοι, § 35, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alacoque, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_6'>156, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alanus ab Insulis, § 102, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaric, § 76, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaviv, § 76, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alba, § 59, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alba, Duke of, § 136, 3; 139, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Albati</foreign>, § 116, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alberich, § 96, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albert the Great, § 103, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Apeldern, § 93, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Bear, § 93, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Buxhöwden, § 93, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Franconia-Brandenburg, § 137, 2, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albert of Mainz, § 122, 2; 123, 8; 134, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albert of Prussia, § 126, 4; 127, 3; 141, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albert of Suerbeer, § 73, 6; 92, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alberti, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albigensians, § 109, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albinus, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alboin, § 76, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albrechtsleute, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_4'>208, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_1'>211, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcantara, Peter of, § 149, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcantarmes, § 98, 8; 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcibiades, § 40, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcuin, § 90, 3; 91, 1, 2; 92, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aldgild, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aleander, § 123, 6, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>d'Aleman, Cardinal, § 110, 8; 118, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alemanni, § 78, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>d'Alembert, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>165, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander II., § 96, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       III., § 96, 15, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       IV., § 96, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       V., § 110, 6; 119, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       VI., § 110, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       VII., § 156, <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_5'>5</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander VIII., § <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>156, 1</ref>, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander I., Czars I., II., III., § <ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>203, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_207_Para_3'>207, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander of Alexandria, § 50, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       "  Antioch, § 50, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       "  Hales, § 103, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       "  Newsky, § 73, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       "  Parma, § 139, 12.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='487'/><anchor id='Pg487'/>

<lg>
<l>Alexander Severus, § 22, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandrian School, § 31, 4; 47, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexis, § 73, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexius Comnenus, § 71, 1, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfarabi, § 103, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alfred the Great, § 90, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Algazel, § 103, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alger of Liege, § 102, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alkindi, § 103, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allatius, Leo, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allegri, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allen, W., § 139, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allendorf, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alliance, The Holy, § 173.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      The Evangelical, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_2'>178, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Saints' Day, § 57, 1; 88, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Souls' Day, § 104, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Almansor, § 95, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Almohaden, § 95, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Almoravides, § 95, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alms, Dispensers of, § 17, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alogians, § 33, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alpers, § 208, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alphonso the Catholic, § 81, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     the Chaste, § 81, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Aragon, Castile, and Portugal, § 95, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alphonso XII., § <ref target='Section_205_Para_3'>205, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alsace-Lorraine, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_7'>196, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Altar, § 38; 60, 5; 88, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Altenburg, § <ref target='Section_194_Para_2'>194, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alting, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_7'>160, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alumbrados, § 149, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alvarus, § 81, 1; 90, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Pelagius, § 118, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alzog, § 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amadeus of Savoy, § 110, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amalarius, § 90, 4; 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amalrich of Bena, § 108, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amandus, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambo, § 60, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambrose, § 47, 15; 50, 4; 57, 2, 3; 59, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambrosian Chant, § 59, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambrosiaster, § 47, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amen Sect, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_8'>211, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>America, § 150, 3; 208; 209.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amesius, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_162_Para_4'>162, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amling, § 144, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammon, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_2'>182, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammonius, § 44, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Saccas, § 24, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amort, § 164, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amsdorf, § 127, 4; 135, 5; 141, 4, 6, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amulets, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_13'>188, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amyrald, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anabaptists, § 124, 1; 130, 5; 133, 6; 147; 148, 1; 163, <ref target='Section_163_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_163_Para_2'>2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anacletus I., § 17, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      II., § 96, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἀνάδοχαι, § 35, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἀναγνώσται, § 34, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anastasius Biblioth., § 90, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       I., § 46, 4; 51, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       II., § 46, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       IV., § 96, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Sinaita, § 47, 12; 60, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anathema, § 52, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anatolius, § 46, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anchorets, § 44.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancyra, Council of, § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderledy, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_1'>182, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anderson, § 139, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andreä, Jac., § 141, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Val., § <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andrew II. of Hungary, § 94, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Crain, § 110, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Crete, § 70, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andronicus Paläologus, § 67, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angela of Brescia, § 149, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angelicals, § 149, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angels, Worship of, § 57, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angelo, Michael, § 115, 13; 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angelus Silesius, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_4'>157, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angilram, § 87, 1.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='488'/><anchor id='Pg488'/>

<lg>
<l>Anglican Church, § 139, 6; <ref target='Section_155'>155</ref>; <ref target='Section_202'>202</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anglo-Saxon Church, § 77, 4, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anhalt, Reformation in, § 133, 4; 144, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anicetus, § 37, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anjou, § 96, 21, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ann, Veneration of St., § 57, 2; 115, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anna of Russia, § 73, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Prussia, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>154, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annats, § 110, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anno of Cologne, § 96, 6; 97, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annunciation, Order of the, § 112, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anomæans, § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ansbert of Milan, § 83, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ansegis, § 87, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anselm of Canterbury, § 67, 4; 96, 12; 101, 1, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anselm of Havelberg, § 67, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Laon, § 101, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Lucca, § 96, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ansgar, § 80, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthimus of Constantinople, § 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthimus, Exarch, § <ref target='Section_207_Para_3'>207, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthony, St., § 44, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Padua, § 98, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Order of St., § 98, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthusa, § 47, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antidicomarianites, § 62, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἀντίδωρα, § 58, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antilegomena, § 36, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἀντιμήνσιον, § 60, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antinomianism, § 27, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antinomian Controversy, § 141, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antioch, Council of, § 50, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antiochean School, § 31, 1; 47, 1; 52, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antiphonal Music, § 59, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Antiphonarium</foreign>, § 59, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antitrinitarians, § 148.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anton of Bourbon, § 139, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anton Paul, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antonelli, § 185, <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_185_Para_4'>4</ref>; <ref target='Section_189_Para_1'>189, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_196_Para_7'>196, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antonians, § <ref target='Section_207_Para_2'>207, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antoninus Pius, § 22, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Florence, § 113, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apelles, § 27, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aphraates, § 47, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apiarius, § 46, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apocrisarians, § 46, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apocrypha, Non-Canonical, § 32.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Deutero-Canonical, § 59, 1; 136, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apocryphal Controversy, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_8'>161, 8</ref>; <ref target='Section_183_Para_4'>183, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollinaris, § 47, 5; 52, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"         Claudius, § 30, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollonius of Tyana, § 24, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollos, § 18, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apologists, Early Christian, § 30, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apology of Augsburg Confession, § 132, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostles of the Lord, §§ 14-16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostles, New Testament Office of, § 17, 5; 37, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostles, Teaching of XII., § 30, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostles, Doctrine of the, § 18, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostles' Creed, § 35, 2; 59, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostolic Age, Beginning and Close of, § 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostolic Church, Constitution of, § 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostolic Epistles, § 32, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Fathers, § 30, 3-6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Constitutions and Canons, § 43, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apostolics, § 62, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Appellants, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Appellatio ab abusu</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_4'>185, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_192_Para_4'>192, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_9'>197, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Appenfeller, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apse, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='489'/><anchor id='Pg489'/>

<lg>
<l>Aquarii, § 27, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aquaviva, § 149, 8, 10, 12; <ref target='Section_156_Para_13'>156, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabia, § 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arbues, § 117, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arcadius, Emperor, § 42, 4; 51, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archbishop, § 46, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archchaplain, § 84, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archdeacon, § 45, 3; 84, 2; 97, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archelaus of Cascar, § 29, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archimandrite, § 44, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Architecture, § 60, 1; 88, 6; 104, 12; 115, 13; 149, 15; <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archpresbyter, § 45, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Areopagite, Dionysius the, § 47, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arialdus, § 97, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arians, § 50; 76.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aribert, § 76, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristides, § 30, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristobulus, § 10, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ariston of Pella, § 30, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotle, § 7, 4; 68, 2; 103, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arius, § 50, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arles, Synod at, § 50, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenian Church, § 64, 3; 72, 2; 82, 8; <ref target='Section_207_Para_4'>207, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arminians, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnaud, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnauld, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arndt, E.M., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_6'>174, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_181_Para_1'>181, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    John, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arno of Salzburg, § 79, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  "  Reichersberg, § 102, 6, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnobius, § 31, 12,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      the Younger, § 53, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnold of Brescia, § 96, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Citeaux, § 109, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Dominican, § 108, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Gottfried, § 5, 3; <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>; 160, <ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnoldi, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_6'>187, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnoldists, § 108, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnulf of Carinthia, § 82, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Rheims, § 96, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arran, Earl of, § 139, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ars Magna, § 103, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Moriendi, § 115, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arsacius, § 51.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arsenius, § 70, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Art, Early Christian and Mediæval, § 38, 3; 60.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artemon, § 33, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Articles of English Church, The XXXIX., § 139, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Articles, Organic, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>203, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artotyrites, § 40, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascension, Festival of, § 56, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       of Mary, § 32, 4; 57, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asceticism, § 39, 3; 44, 6; 70, 3; 107.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aschaffenberg Concord, § 110, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ash Wednesday, § 56, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asia Minor, Theological School of, § 31, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asinarii, § 23, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asseburg, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assemani, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>165, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assenath, § 32, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asses, Feast of, § 105, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asterius, § 50, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Amasa, § 57, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Astruc, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_11'>165, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asylum, Right of, § 43, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athanaric, § 76.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athanasian Creed, § 59, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athanasius, § 44; 47, 3; 50; 52, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athenagoras, § 30, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athos, Monks of Mount, § 70, 3; 69, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Atrium</foreign>, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attila, § 46, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atto of Vercelli, § 100, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>d'Aubigné, Merle, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_2'>178, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Th. A., § 139, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Audians, § 62, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Audientes</foreign>, § 35, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Audientia episc.</foreign>, § 43, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augsburg Confession, § 132, 7.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='490'/><anchor id='Pg490'/>

<lg>
<l>Augsburg Religious Peace, § 137, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustus of Saxony, § 141, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augusta, § 139, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augusti, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_5'>182, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustine, § 47, 18, 19; 53, 2-5; 54, 1; 61, 1, 4; 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustine, Missionary to England, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustinus Triumphus, § 118, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustinian Order, § 98, 6; 112, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>August Conference, § <ref target='Section_179_Para_1'>179, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurelian, Emperor, § 22, 5; 33, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Bishop, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Auricular Confession, § 61, 1; 104, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurifaber, § 129, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ausculta fili</foreign>, § 110, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australia, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_7'>184, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_12'>202, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austria, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_190_Para_3'>190, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_198'>198</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autbert, § 81, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Auto al nasciemento, § 115, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   de fé, § 117, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   sacramentale, § 115, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autocephalic Bishops, § 46, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Auxentius of Dorostorus, § 76, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Milan, § 47, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avars, § 79, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avenarius, § 142, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aventin, § 120, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Averrhoes, § 103, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avicenna, § 103, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avignon, § 110, 2-5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avitus, § 53, 6; 76, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Azimites, § 67, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baader, Francis, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_5'>175, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>187, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_2'>191, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baanes, § 71, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babäus, § 52, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babeuf, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_1'>212, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian Exile of Popes, § 110, 2-5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bach, Sebastian, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_7'>167, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, Roger, § 103, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, Lord Verulam, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_1'>164, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baden, § 196, <ref target='Section_196_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_196_Para_3'>3</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_13'>197, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahrdt, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baius, Michael, § 149, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bajazet, § 110, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baläus, § 48, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balde, Jac., § <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baldwin of Jerusalem, § 94, 1; 98, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baldwin of Flanders, § 94, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Heretic, § 108, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balsamon, § 68, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balthazar of Fulda, § 151, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baltic Provinces of Russia, § 139, 3; <ref target='Section_206_Para_3'>206, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baltimore, Lord, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_5'>208, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baltzer, § 191, <ref target='Section_191_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_191_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baluzius, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bampfield, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_3'>163, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ban, § 89, 6; 106, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bañez, § 149, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bangor, § 85, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baphomet, § 112, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptism, § 35, 2-4; 58, 1, 5; 141, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptismal Font, § 60, 4; 88, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Baptismus Clinicorum</foreign>, § 35, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptists, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_3'>163, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_170_Para_6'>170, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_3'>211, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptistries, § 60, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bär, David, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baradai, § 52, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barbatianus, § 62, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barbs, § 108, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barckhausen, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barclay, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_5'>163, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bar-Cochba, § 25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bardesanes, § 27, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barefooted Friars, § 98, 3; 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bar Hanina, § 47, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bar Hebræus, § 72, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bari, Synod at, § 67, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barkers, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_7'>170, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barlaam, § 67, 5; 69, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barlaam and Josaphat, § 68, 6.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='491'/><anchor id='Pg491'/>

<lg>
<l>Barletta, § 115, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barnabas, § 14; 30, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barnabites, § 149, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barnim, § 133, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baronius, § 5, 2; 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barriere, § 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barrow, § 143, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barsumas, § 52, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bartholomew, Massacre of St., § 139, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bartholomew of Pisa, § 98, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bartolemeo, Fra, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basedow, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>171, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basel, § 130, 3, 8; <ref target='Section_196_Para_4'>196, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Council of, § 110, 8, 9; 119, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basil the Great, § 44; 47, 4; 59, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   chief of Bogomili, § 71, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Ancyra, § 50, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Macedonian, § 67, 1; 68, 1; 71, 1; 73, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basilica, § 60, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basilicus, § 139, 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basilides, the Gnostic, § 27, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       the Martyr, § 22, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basnage, § 5, 2; <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basrelief, § 60, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bassi, § 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bathori, Steph., § 139, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bauer, Bruno, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_1'>174, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_6'>182, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Lor., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_7'>171, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baumgarten-Crusius, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_4'>182, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       M., § <ref target='Section_180_Para_1'>180, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_194_Para_6'>194, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Sigism. Jac., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baumstark, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baur, Chr. F., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_7'>182, 7</ref>; 5, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Gust., § <ref target='Section_194_Para_1'>194, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bautain, § 91, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavaria, § 78, 2; 151, 2; <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>; <ref target='Section_195'>195</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_14'>197, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavo, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baxter, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_3'>162, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bayle, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_4'>164, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bayly, Lewis, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_3'>162, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beatification, § 104, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beaton, § 139, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beaumont, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bebel, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_5'>212, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bebenburg, § 118, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beccus, § 67, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beck, Tob., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_12'>182, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Becket, § 96, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bede, The Venerable, § 90, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beethoven, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_10'>174, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Begging Friars, § 98, 3-6; 103, 3-6; 112, 2-6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beghards and Beguins, § 98, 7; 116, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bekker, Balthaz., § <ref target='Section_161_Para_5'>161, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belgium, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_4'>200, 4-7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellarmine, § 149, 4, 10, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beller, Card., § <ref target='Section_188_Para_13'>188, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellini, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bells, § 60, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Baptism of, § 88, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Βῆμα, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bembo, § 120, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benard, Lor., § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bender, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_4'>176, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedetto of Mantova, § 139, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedict III., § 82, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     V., § 96, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     VI., VII., § 96, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     VIII., IX., 96, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     X., § 96, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     XI., § 110, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     XII., § 110, 4; 67, 5; 112, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedict XIII., XIV., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_1'>165, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Aniane, § 85, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Levita, § 87, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Nursia, § 85, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedictines, § 85; 98, 1; 112, 1; <ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>186, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedict Medal, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_13'>188, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benefice System, § 86, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bengel, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>167, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benno of Meissen, § 93, 9; 129, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berengar, § 101, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='492'/><anchor id='Pg492'/>

<lg>
<l>Berengar, I., II., § 96, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berg, John, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Book of, § 141, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berlage, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_6'>188, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berleburger Bible, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bern, § 130, 4; 199, <ref target='Section_199_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_199_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernard of Clairvaux, § 102, 2, 3; 94, 2; 96, 13; 104, 10; 108, 2, 3, 7; 109.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernard the Missionary, § 93, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Sylvester, § 102, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    de Saisset, § 110, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Tolomei, § 112, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernardino of Siena, § 112, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bernardines, § 98, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berno of Clugny, § 98, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berruyer, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>165, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bertha, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bertheau, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_11'>182, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berthold of Limoges, § 98, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Loccum, § 93, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Regensburg, § 104, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Leonard, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_7'>171, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berti, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bertrada, § 96, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bertrand de Got, § 110, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berylle, Pet., § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beryllus, § 33, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bespopowtschini, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>163, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bessarion, § 67, 6; 68, 2; 120, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Besser, § <ref target='Section_181_Para_4'>181, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bestmann, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_21'>182, 21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bethel, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bethman-Hollweg, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_4'>193, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beuggen, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beust, von, § 198, <ref target='Section_198_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_198_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beyschlag, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_10'>182, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beza, § 138, 8; 139, 14; 143, 2, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bianchi, § 116, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bible Societies, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_4'>183, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Communists, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>211, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Revision, § <ref target='Section_181_Para_4'>181, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Translations, § 37, 1; 59, 1; 115, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bible reading forbidden, § 105, 3; <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Biblia pauperum</foreign>, § 115, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bickell, § <ref target='Section_194_Para_4'>194, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biedermann, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_19'>182, 19</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biel, Gebr, § 113, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bienemann, § 142, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bilderdijk, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>200, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Billicanus, § 122, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bilocation, § 105, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bingham, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bischof, Conrad, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishops, § 17, 5; 34, 2; 45; 84; 97.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Election of, § 34, 3; 45; 84; 97, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishops' Bible, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>202, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Paragraph, § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_11'>11</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_12'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bismarck, § <ref target='Section_197'>197</ref>; <ref target='Section_212_Para_5'>212, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bittner, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blackburne, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blahoslaw, § 139, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blanc, Louis, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_1'>212, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blandina, § 22, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blandrata, § 148, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bläsilla, § 44, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blastus, § 37, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blau, Dr., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_13'>165, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blaurer, § 125, 1; 133, 3; 143, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blaurock, § 147, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blavatski, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_18'>211, 18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bleek, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_11'>182, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blondel, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood vases, § 35, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   baptism, § 35, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   revenge, § 88, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bloody Marriage, § 139, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blot-Sweyn, § 93, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blount, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_3'>168, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blue Ribbon Army, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_2'>211, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blum, Bishop, § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_11'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blumhardt, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_5'>196, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bluntschli, § <ref target='Section_180_Para_1'>180, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_196_Para_3'>196, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boabdil, § 95.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bobadilla, § 149, 8.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='493'/><anchor id='Pg493'/>

<lg>
<l>Bobbio, § 78, 1; 85, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boccaccio, § 115, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bochart, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bodelschwingh, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bodin, § 117, 4; 148, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boeckh, § <ref target='Section_181_Para_3'>181, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boethius, § 47, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bogatzky, § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bogomili, § 71, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bogoris, § 72, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Böhl v. Faber, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_7'>174, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Böhme, Jacob, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>160, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Mart., § 142, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemia, § 79, 3; 93, 6; 139, 19; <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemian Brethren, § 119, 8; 139, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Böhmer, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_5'>167, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Böhringer, § 5, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bois, Professor, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_8'>203, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolanden, Cour. v., § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boleslaw of Poland, § 93, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Bohemia, 93, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Chrobry, 93, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boleyn, Anne, § 139, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolingbroke, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolivia, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_2'>209, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bollandists, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolsec, § 138, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolsena, Mass of, § 104, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bomberg, § 120, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bomelius, § 125, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bona, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonald, § 186, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonaventura, § 103, 4; 104, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface, Apostle of Germany, § 78, 4-8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface I., § 46, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      II., § 46, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      III., IV., § 46, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      VI., § 82, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      VII., § 96, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      VIII., § 110, 1; 99, 4; 117, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      IX., § 110, 6; 117, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Boni homines</foreign>, § 108, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonner, Bp., § 139, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonosus, § 62, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Book of Discipline, § 139, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boos, Mart., § <ref target='Section_187_Para_2'>187, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Booth, General, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_2'>211, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bordelum, Sectaries at, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borgia, § 110, 10, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Francis, § 149, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borromeo, § 149, 17; 151, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Society, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_4'>186, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borsenius, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boruth, § 79, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borziwoi, § 79, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bosio, Ant., § 38, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boso, § 95, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bossuet, § 5, 2; <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_156_Para_3'>156, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bost, Pastor, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>156, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bothwell, § 139, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bourdaloue, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_2'>159, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bourgos, Pragmatic Sanction of, § 110, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bourignon, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_4'>157, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bouthillier de Rancé, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boyle, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>164, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bradacz, M. v., § 119, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bradwardine, § 113, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Braga, Syn. of, § 76, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brakel, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_2'>169, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bramante, § 115, 3; 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brandenburg, § 134, 5; <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>154, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brandt, § <ref target='Section_181_Para_4'>181, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Braniss, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brant, Seb., § 115, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Braun, Hermesian, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_1'>191, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brazil, § 150, 3; <ref target='Section_209_Para_3'>209, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breckling, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_9'>163, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breithaupt, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breitinger, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_6'>162, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bremen, § 127, 4; 144, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brendel, § 151, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brentano, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_3'>188, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='494'/><anchor id='Pg494'/>

<lg>
<l>Brenz, § 131, 1; 133, 3; 141, 8; 142, 2, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brest, Synod of, § 72, 4; 151, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brethren, The four long, § 51, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of the Free Spirit, § 116, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brethren of the Common Life, § 112, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brethren, Bohemian and Moravian, § 119, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brethren, The United, § <ref target='Section_168'>168</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bretschneider, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_2'>182, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bretwalda, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breviary, § 56, 2; 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Briçonnet, § 120, 8; 138, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridaine, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridge-Brothers, § 98, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridget, St., § 110, 5; 112, 4, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridgewater Treatises, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brief, Papal, § 110, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Briesmann, § 139, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brinckerinck, § 112, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brinkmann, § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_11'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Britons, Ancient, § 77.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Broad Churchmen, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>202, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Broglie, Duc de, § 203, <ref target='Section_203_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_203_Para_6'>6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Bishop, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_1'>200, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brothers of the Common Life, § 112, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brothers of Mercy, § 149, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brothers of the Free Spirit, § 116, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, Archbishop, of Dublin, § 139, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, Rob. (Brownist), § 143, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Thomas, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>164, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruccioli, § 115, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brück, Dr., § 132, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brucker, Jac., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>167, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruggeler, Sectaries, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brunehilde, § 77, 7; 46, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruneleschi, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruno of Cologne, § 97, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Missionary, § 93, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Rheims, § 98, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Toul, § 96, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Giordano, § 146, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brunswick, § 127, 4; 135, 6; <ref target='Section_194_Para_5'>194, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bucer, § 122, 2; 124, 3; 131, 1; 133, 8; 135, 1, 3, 7; 139, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buchel, Anna v., § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buchführer, § 128, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Büchner, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Budæus, § 120, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddeus, § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buffalo Synod, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_4'>208, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bugenhagen, § 125, 1; 127, 4; 133, 4; 139, 2; 142, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bülau, § 139, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgaria, § 67, 1; 73, 3; <ref target='Section_175_Para_4'>175, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_207_Para_3'>207, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bulgari</foreign>, § 108, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulls, Papal, § 110, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bull, The Golden, § 97, 2; 110, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bullinger, § 133, 8; 138, 7; <ref target='Section_161_Para_4'>161, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bunsen, § 181, <ref target='Section_181_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_181_Para_4'>4</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_17'>182, 17</ref>; <ref target='Section_198_Para_1'>198, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bunyan, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_3'>162, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Büren, § 144, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burgundians, § 76, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burmann, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burnet, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bursfeld, Congregation of, § 112, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Busch, John, § 112, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Busembaum, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>; 149, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buttlar Sectaries, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butter week, § 56, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buxhöwden, § 93, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buxtorf, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byron, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_7'>174, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byse, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_8'>200, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caballero, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_7'>174, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cabasilas, § 68, 5; 70, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cabet, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_3'>212, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cabrera, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_4'>205, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cadan, Peace of, § 133, 3.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='495'/><anchor id='Pg495'/>

<lg>
<l>Cæcilius, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cædmon, § 89, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cæsarius of Arles, § 47, 20; 53, 5; 61, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cæsarius of Heisterbach, § 103, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cainites, § 27, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caius, § 31, 7; 33, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cajetan, Card., § 122, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Thiene, § 149, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calas, § 164, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calatrava, Order of, § 98, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calderon, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calendar Reform, § 149, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calixt, Geo., § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>; 158, <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>2</ref>, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calixtines, § 119, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calixtus II., § 96, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     III., § 96, 15; 110, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Callinice, § 71, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Callistus, § 33, 5; 41, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calmet, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>165, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calov, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>; 159, <ref target='Section_159_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_159_Para_5'>5</ref>; <ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>160, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calvin, § 138; 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camaldulensian Order, § 98, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Camera Romana</foreign>, § 110, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camerarius, § 142, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camisards, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campanella, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_1'>164, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campanus, § 148, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campbellites, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_6'>170, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campe, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>171, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campegius, § 126, 2, 3; 132, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Campello, § <ref target='Section_190_Para_3'>190, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camp-Meeting, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Cancellaria Romana</foreign>, § 110, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canisius, § 149, 14; 151, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Society, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_4'>186, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canon, Biblical, § 36, 8; 59, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of the Mass, § 59, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    in Music, § 115, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Law, § 43, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Canones Apostt.</foreign>, § 43, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canonesses, § 85, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canonical Age, § 45, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Life, § 84, 4; 97, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Canonici</foreign>, § 84, 4; 97, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canossa, § 96, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canova, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canstein, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>167, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Cantores</foreign>, § 34, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Cantus Ambros.</foreign>, § 59, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    figuratus, § 104, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    firmus, § 59, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canute the Great, § 93, 2, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canus, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canz, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_2'>167, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capistran, § 112, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capito, § 124, 3; 130, 3; 131, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Capitula Carisiaca</foreign>, § 91, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      <foreign rend='italic'>Clausa</foreign>, § 111.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      <foreign rend='italic'>episcoporum</foreign>, § 87, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capitularies, § 87, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cappadocians, The Three, § 47, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cappadose, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>200, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cappel, Peace of, § 130, 9, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cappellus, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capuchins, § 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caraccioli, § 139, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caraffa, § 149, 2, 7; 139, 22, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carantanians, § 79, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carbeas, § 71, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cardale, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cardinals, § 97, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carey, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>172, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carl, Dr., § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlomann, § 78, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlstadt, § 122, 4; 124, 1, 3; 131, 1; 139, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carmelites, § 98, 6; 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnesecchi, § 139, 22, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnival, § 56, 4; 105, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpentarius, § 128, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpocrates, § 27, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpov, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpzov, J. B., § 117, 4, <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_167_Para_1'>167, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpzov, J. G., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carranza, § 139, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carrasco, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_4'>205, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='496'/><anchor id='Pg496'/>

<lg>
<l>Carthusians, § 98, 2; 112.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>las Casas, § 150, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Casimir of Berleburg, § <ref target='Section_170'>170</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Brunswick, § 126, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassander, § 137, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassel, Religious Conference of, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassianus, § 44, 4; 47, 21; 53, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassiodorus, § 47, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castellio, § 138, 4; 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castellus, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castelnau, Pet. v., § 109, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Casuists, § 113, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Casula, § 59, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catacombs, § 38, 1-3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cataphrygians, § 40, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catechetical School, § 31, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catechism, Heidelberg, § 144, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Luther's, § 127, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catechisms, § 115, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catechismus Genevensis, § 138, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Romanus, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catechoumens, § 35, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Catenæ</foreign>, § 48, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cathari, § 108, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catharine of Aragon, § 139, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Bora, § 129.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     de Medici, § 139, 13 ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II. of Russia, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     St., of Sweden, § 112, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Siena, § 112, 4; 110, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cathedral, § 84, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Schools, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholicus, § 52, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholicity, § 20, 2; 34, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cave, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celbes, § 28, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celibacy, § 39, 3; 45, 2; 84, 3; 96, 7; 111, 1; <ref target='Section_187_Para_4'>187, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cellites, § 116, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celsus, § 23, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celtes, Conrad, § 120, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celtic Church, § 77.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cemeteries, § 38; 60, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cencius, § 96, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Centuries, The Magdeburg, § 5, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceolfrid, § 77, 3, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cerdo, § 27, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cerinthus, § 17, 3; 27, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cesarini, § 110, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cesena, § 112, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cevennes, Prophets of the, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>; 170, <ref target='Section_170_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_170_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaila, du, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalcedon, Council of, § 46, 1, 7; 52, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaldean Christians, § 52, 3; 72, 1; 150, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalmers, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_2'>178, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_7'>202, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chalybæus, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chambre ardente</foreign>, § 139, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chamier, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chandler, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Channing, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_4'>208, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chantal, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_1'>157, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chapels, § 84, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chaplain, § 84, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chapter of Cathedral, § 84, 4; 97, 2; 111.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chapters, Controversy of the three, § 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charlemagne, § 78, 9; 79, 5; 81, 1; 82, 2, 3; 89, 2; 90, 1; 92, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles of Anjou, § 96, 20-22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Bald, § 82, 4, 5, 8; 90, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Martel, § 81; 82, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., Emperor, § 110, 4, 5; 117, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    VII. of France, § 110, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    V., Emperor, § 123, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    I., II. of England, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>; 155, <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IX. of France, § 139, 14-16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IX. of Sweden, § 139, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    XII. of Sweden, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>165, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Albert of Sardinia, § <ref target='Section_204_Para_1'>204, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='497'/><anchor id='Pg497'/>

<lg>
<l>Charles Felix of Sardinia, § <ref target='Section_204_Para_1'>204, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Alexander of Württemberg, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_5'>165, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles Theodore of Bavaria, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles of Lorraine, Cardinal, § 139, 13; 149, 2, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charisms, § 17, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chastel, § 5, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chateaubriand, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_7'>174, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chatel, Abbé, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_6'>187, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chatimar, § 79, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chazari, § 73, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chemnitz, § 141, 2, 12; 142, 2, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherbury, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>164, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children, The Praying, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_1'>167, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Baptism of, § 17, 7; 35, 4; 58, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children's Communion, § 36, 3; 58, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children's Crusade, § 94, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chili, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_2'>209, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiliasm, § 33, 9; 40, 4; 108, 5; <ref target='Section_162_Para_1'>162, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_7'>211, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chillingworth, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>China, § 93, 15; 150, 1; <ref target='Section_156_Para_12'>156, 12</ref>; <ref target='Section_165_Para_3'>165, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_184_Para_6'>184, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_186_Para_7'>186, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chinese Rites, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_12'>156, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Choir, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chorale, § 142, 5; <ref target='Section_160_Para_5'>160, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_181_Para_2'>181, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chorepiscopi</foreign>, § 34, 3; 45; 84; 97, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Choristers, § 97, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chorisantes</foreign>, § 116, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chosroes, § 11; 64, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrism, § 35, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ, Order of, § 112, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian Association (German), § <ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>172, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian, Bishop, § 93, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      II., III. of Denmark, § 139, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian Baptists, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_6'>170, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christina of Sweden, § 153, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christopher of Württemberg, § 133, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Christo sacrum</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_4'>172, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Χριστὸς πάσχων, § 48, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrodegang of Metz, § 48, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Chronicon paschale</foreign>, § 48, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysolaras, § 120, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysologus, § 47, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysostom, § 47, 8; 51, 3; 53, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chubb, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Churches, § 38.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Church Army, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_2'>211, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Discipline, § 39; 61; 89, 6; 106.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   History, Idea, Periods, Sources, etc., of, §§ 1-5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Law, Catholic, § 43, 3-5; 68, 5; 87; 99, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Law, Protestant, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_5'>167, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Property, § 45, 4; 86, 1; 96, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   States, § 82, 1; <ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>185, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Year, § 56, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chytræus, § 141, 12; 142, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ciborium</foreign>, § 60, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cilicium, § 106.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cimabue, § 104, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcelliones, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cistercians, § 98, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ciudad, § 147, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clara of Assisi, § 98, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Nuns of St., § 98, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarendon, Council at, § 96, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, Sam., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><emph>Classes</emph>, § 143, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Classical Synods, § 143, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claude, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claudius Apollinaris, § 30, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    I., Emperor, § 22, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II.,   "      § 22, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Savoy, § 148, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     " Turin, § 90, 4; 92, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Matthias, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clausen, § <ref target='Section_201_Para_1'>201, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='498'/><anchor id='Pg498'/>

<lg>
<l>Clemangis, § 110, 3; 118, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clemens, F. J., § <ref target='Section_191_Para_3'>191, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement of Alexandria, § 31, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Rome, § 30, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., § 96, 4, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., § 96, 8, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., § 96, 20; 103, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    V., § 110, 2; 112, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    VI., § 110, 4, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    VII., § 110, 6; 126, 2; 132, 2; 149, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    VIII., § 110, 7; 149, 2, 13, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IX., X., § <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>156, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    XI., § 165, <ref target='Section_165_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    XIII., XIV., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    a Heretic of Britain, § 78, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clementine Homilies and Recognitions, § 28, 3, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Clementinæ</foreign>, § 99, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleomenes, § 33, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clergy, § 34, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Clerici vagi</foreign>, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Clericis laicos</foreign>, § 110, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clericus, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clermont, Synod at, § 94; 96, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Climacus, § 47, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Clinici</foreign>, § 34, 3; 45, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cloister Schools, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cloots, Anach., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>165, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clothilda, § 76, 5, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clovis, § 76, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clugny, § 98, 1; <ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>165, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cluniacs, § 98, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cocceius, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>6</ref>; <ref target='Section_162_Para_5'>162, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cochlæus, § 129, 1; 135, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cock, H. de, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>200, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Codde, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_8'>165, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Codex Alexandrinus, § <ref target='Section_152_Para_2'>152, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Sinaiticus, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_11'>182, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cœlestine I., § 46, 1; 52, 3; 53, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., § 96, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., § 96, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., § 96, 19.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    V., § 96, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cœlestines, § 98, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Eremites, § 98, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cœlestius, § 53, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cœlicolæ, § 42, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cœnobites, § 44.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coisi, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coke, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_4'>169, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colani, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_8'>203, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colenso, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_4'>202, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coleridge, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>202, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colet, § 120, 6, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Colidei</foreign>, § 77, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coligny, § 139, 14, 16; 143, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collatio cum Donatist.</foreign>, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collegia philobibl.</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pietatis</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collegial System, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_5'>167, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collegiants, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_1'>163, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collegiate Foundations, § 84, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Collegium caritativum</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Germanicum</foreign>, § 151, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Helveticum</foreign>, § 151, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collenbusch, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_3'>172, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collins, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collyridian Nuns, § 57, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colman, § 77, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cologne, Cathedral of, § 104, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Conflict of, § <ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>190, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Reformation of, § 135, 7; 136, 2; 137, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colombière, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_6'>156, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colonna, § 110, 1, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Vittoria, § 139, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columba, § 77, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columbanus, § 77, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columbus, § 116.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comenius, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_9'>163, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_168_Para_2'>168, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Comes Hieron.</foreign>, § 59, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commendatory Abbots, § 85, 5; 111, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commodian, § 31, 12; 33, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commodus, § 22, 2.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='499'/><anchor id='Pg499'/>

<lg>
<l>Common Prayer, Book of, § 139, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Communicatio idiomatum</foreign>, § 141, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communism, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>211, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_212_Para_1'>212, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compact, The Basel, § 119, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Competentes, § 35, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compiegne, Diet of, § 82, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Composition, § 89, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compromise, Belgian, § 139, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comte, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_210_Para_1'>210, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concha, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Concilium Germanicum</foreign>, § 78, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conclave, § 96, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concomitantia, § 105, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concord of Wittenberg, § 133, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Formula of, § 141, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concordat of Austria, § <ref target='Section_198_Para_2'>198, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Baden, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_2'>196, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Bavaria, § <ref target='Section_195_Para_1'>195, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " France, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>203, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Holland, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_1'>200, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Portugal, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_5'>205, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Prussia, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>193, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Spain, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_1'>205, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Upper Rhine, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_1'>196, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Vienna, § 110, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Worms, § 96, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Württemberg, § 96, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Condé, § 139, 14, 16, 17.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Louise de, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>186, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conference, Evangelical, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_4'>178, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio</foreign>, § 57, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confession, § 36, 3; 61, 1; 89, 6; 104, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessio Augustana</foreign>, § 132, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"         "          <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Variata</foreign>, § 141, 4, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Belgica</foreign>, § 139, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bohemica</foreign>, § 139, 19.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Czengeriana</foreign>, § 139, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Gallicana</foreign>, § 139, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hafnica</foreign>, § 139, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Helvetica</foreign> I., § 133, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"           "     II., § 138, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hungarica</foreign>, § 139, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Marchica</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>154, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Saxonica</foreign>, § 136, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Scotica</foreign>, § 139, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sigismundi</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>154, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tetrapolit.</foreign>, § 132, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confession, Westminster, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Württemberg, § 136, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confessores</foreign>, § 22, 5; 39, 2, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confirmation, § 35, 4; 139, 19; <ref target='Section_167_Para_2'>167, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Confutatio Conf. August.</foreign>, § 132, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congregatio de auxiliis, § 149, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"         <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de propag. fides</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_9'>156, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congregationalists, § 143, 4; <ref target='Section_162_Para_1'>162, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_5'>202, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congregations, § 98, 1; <ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>186, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conon, Pope, § 46, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cononites, § 57, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conrad I., Emperor, § 96, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II., § 96, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   III., § 96, 13; 94, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   IV., § 96, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Hochsteden, § 104, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    " Marburg, § 109, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    " Massovia, § 93, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    " Megenburg, § 118, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conradin, § 96, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consalvi, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_192_Para_3'>192, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conscientiarii, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_4'>164, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consensus Dresdensis, § 141, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Genev., § 138, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Sendomir, § 139, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     repetitus, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_2'>159, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Tigurinus, § 138, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consilia evangelica, § 39.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consistories, § 142, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Consolamentum</foreign>, § 108, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constance, Council of, § 110, 7; 119, 5, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantia, § 50, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine the Great, § 28, 7; 42, 1, 2; 60, 1; 63, 1.</l>
<pb n='500'/><anchor id='Pg500'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      I., Pope, § 46, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      II.,  "   § 82, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Chrysomalus, § 70, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Copronymus, § 66, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Mananalis, § 71, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Monomachus, § 67, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Pogonnatus, § 52, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Porphyrogenneta, § 68, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantinople, Second Œcum. Council at, § 46, 1; 50, 4, 5; 52, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"         Fifth Œcum. Council at, § 52, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"         Sixth Œcum. Council at, § 52, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"         Seventh Œcum. Council at, § 66, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"         Eighth Œcum. Council at, § 67, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantius, § 42, 2; 50, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Chlorus, § 22, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Constitutio Rom.</foreign>, § 82, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constitution of Early Church, § 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constitutiones apost., § 43, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contarini, § 135, 2; 139, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Continentes</foreign>, § 39, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contraremonstrants, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Convenensa</foreign>, § 108, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conventuals, § 112, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Conversi</foreign>, § 98.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Converts, Romish, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>153, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_165_Para_6'>165, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Convocation, English, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_3'>202, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Copts, § 52, 7; 72, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coquerel, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_4'>203, 4</ref>, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coracion, § 33, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coran, § 65.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corbinian, § 78, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cordeliers, § 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornelius, Bishop, § 42, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coronation, Papal, § 96, 23; 110, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Corporale</foreign>, § 60, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corporations Act, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>155, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_5'>202, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Corpus Cathol. et Evangel.</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>153, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Christi</foreign> Festival, § 104, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>doctr. Misnicum</foreign>, § 141, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juris canon.</foreign>, § 99, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pruthen.</foreign>, § 141, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Correctores Rom.</foreign>, § 99, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Correggio, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosmas of Jerusalem, § 70, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Indicopleustes, § 48, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Patr., § 70, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Usurpator, § 66, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cossa, Cardinal, § 110, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Costa, Is. da, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>200, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coster, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cotta, Urs., § 122, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Councils, Œcumenical, § 43, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Counter-Reformation, § 151; 153; <ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>165, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cour, Did. de la, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_4'>156, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Courland, § 93, 12; 139, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Court, Ant., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_5'>165, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Covenant, § 139, 8; <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cowper, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_4'>172, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cranach, § 142, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cranmer, § 139, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cranz, § 115, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crasselius, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crato of Crafftheim, § 141, 10; 137, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creationism, § 53, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crell, J., § 148, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Nich., § 141, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Paul, § 141, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crescens, § 30, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crescentius, § 96, 2, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creuzer, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_4'>174, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cromwell, § 153, <ref target='Section_153_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>6</ref>; <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1-3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crookes, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_17'>211, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross, § 38, 2; 60, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Discovery of the, § 57, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Ordeal of the, § 88, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Sign of the, § 39, 1; 59, 8; 72, 5.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='501'/><anchor id='Pg501'/>

<lg>
<l>Crotus, Rubianus, § 120, 2, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crucifix, § 60, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cruciger, § 136, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cruco, § 93, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crüger, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_5'>160, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crusaders, § 98, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crusades, § 94; 105, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crusius, Mart., § 139, 26.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Chr. Aug., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crypto-Calvinists, § 141, 10, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crypts, § 38, 1; 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cubricus, § 29, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cudworth, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>164, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Culdees, § 77, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cum ex apostolatus officio</foreign>, § 149, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cummins, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cunæus, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cupola, § 60, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Curati</foreign>, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curæus, § 141, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curci, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_5'>187, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curia, The Papal, § 110, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Curio, § 139, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cursores, § 60, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cusa, Nich. of, § 113, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynewulf, § 89, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyprian, St., § 22, 5; 31, 11; 34, 1, 7, 8; 35, 3; 39, 2; 41, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Antioch, § 48, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Sal., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyran, St., § <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>157, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyriacus, § 104, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyril of Alexandria, § 47, 6; 52, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Jerusalem, § 47, 10; 52, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Lucar, § <ref target='Section_152_Para_2'>152, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   and Methodius, § 73, 2, 3; 79, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyrillonas, § 48, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyrus of Alexandria, § 52, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Czersky, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_6'>186, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dach, Sim., § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dächsel, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_4'>186, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dagobert I., § 78, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daillé, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalberg, J. v., § 120, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     K. Th. v., § <ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>187, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_192_Para_2'>192, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dale, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_3'>202, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dalmatica</foreign>, § 59, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damascus I., § 46, 4; 59, 1, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., § 96, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Dames du Cœur sacré</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_1'>186, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damiani, Petrus, § 97, 4; 104, 10; 106, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damiens, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dandalo, § 94, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daniel of Winchester, § 78, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danites, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_14'>211, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dankbrand, § 93, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dannecker, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dannhauer, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_5'>159, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dante, § 115, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Danzig, § 139, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darboy, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darbyites, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_11'>211, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darnley, § 139, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darwin, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Dataria Rom.</foreign>, § 110, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daub, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_6'>182, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daumer, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>David of Augsburg, § 103, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Dinant, § 108, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Christian, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davidis, Fr., § 148, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davis, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_17'>211, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deacon, § 17, 5; 34, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deaconess, § 34, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deaconess-institutes, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dean, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decius, Emperor, § 22, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Nich., § 142, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Declaratio Thornuensis, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decretals, § 46, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decretists, § 99, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decretum Gelasianum, § 47, 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Gratiani, § 99, 5.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='502'/><anchor id='Pg502'/>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Defensores</foreign>, § 45, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deism, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>164, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delicieux, § 117, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delitzsch, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_14'>182, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delrio, § 149, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demetrius of Alexandria, § 31, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Cydonius, § 68, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Mysos, § 139, 36.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demiurge, § 26, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denek, § 148, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denecker, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denifle, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denison, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>202, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denmark, § 80; 93, 2; 139, 2; <ref target='Section_201_Para_1'>201, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denzinger, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_9'>191, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Derezer, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_11'>165, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dernbach, § 151, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De salute animarum</foreign>, § 193, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Desanctis, § <ref target='Section_204_Para_4'>204, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Descant, § 104, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Descartes, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_164_Para_1'>164, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deseret, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_12'>211, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Desiderius, § 82, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Desprez, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_3'>203, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dessau, Convention of, § 126, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dessler, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deutinger, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Deutsche Theologie,</q> § 114, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Valenti, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Devay, § 139, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dhu Nowas, § 64, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diana of Poitiers, § 139, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diatessaron, § 30, 9; 36, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diaz, Juan, § 135, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Didache, § 30, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Didascalia Apost.</foreign>, § 43, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Didenhofen, Synod of, § 82, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diderot, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>165, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Didier de la Cour, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Didymus of Alexandria, § 47, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Gabr, § 124, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dieckhoff, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_21'>182, 21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diedrich, § <ref target='Section_177_Para_3'>177, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diepenbrock, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_1'>189, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dieringer, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dies Stationum</foreign>, § 37; 56, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diestel, Past., § <ref target='Section_176_Para_3'>176, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dietrich, Meister, § 103, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Veit, § 142, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dillmann, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_11'>182, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinant, David of, § 108, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinder, Archbishop, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_12'>197, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinkel, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>187, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinter, § 173, 3; <ref target='Section_180_Para_4'>180, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diocletian, Emperor, § 22, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diodorus of Tarsus, § 47, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diognetus, § 30, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysius of Alexandria, § 31, 6, 14; 33, 7, 9; 35, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     the Areopagite, § 47, 11; 90, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign rend='italic'>Exiguus</foreign>, § 47, 23.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Paris, § 25.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Rome, § 33, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dioscurus of Alexandria, § 52, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Rome, § 46, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dippel, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_3'>170, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diptychs, § 59, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Disciplina arcani</foreign>, § 36, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disputation at Baden, § 130, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Basel, § 130, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Bern, § 130, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Leipzig, § 122, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Rome, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_3'>175, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Zürich, § 130, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dissenters, § 143, 3, 4; <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1-3</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_5'>202, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dober, § 168, <ref target='Section_168_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_168_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_168_Para_11'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Docetism, § 26, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Doctor acutus</foreign>, §  113, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>angelicus</foreign>, § 103, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>audientium</foreign>, § 33, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Christianiss.</foreign>, § 113, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ecstaticus</foreign>, § 114, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>invincibilis</foreign>, § 113, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>irrefragibilis</foreign>, § 103, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>melifluus</foreign>, § 102, 2.</l>
<pb n='503'/><anchor id='Pg503'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mirabilis</foreign>, § 103, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>profundus</foreign>, § 103, 8; 116, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>resolutissimus</foreign>, § 113, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>seraphicus</foreign>, § 103, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>subtilis</foreign>, § 113, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>universalis</foreign>, § 103, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Doctores audientium</foreign>, § 34, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ecclesiæ</foreign>, § 47, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Döderlein, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dodwell, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dolcino, § 108, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Döllinger, § 190, 5; 191, <ref target='Section_191_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_191_Para_9'>9</ref>; <ref target='Section_175_Para_6'>175, 6</ref>; 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domenichino, § 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domenico da Pescia, § 119, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dominic, St., § 98, 4; 106, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dominicans, § 98, 5; 109, 2; 112, 4; <ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>186, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dominus ac redemt.</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domitian, Emperor, § 22, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Abbot, § 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domnus of Antioch, § 52, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Donatio Constantini</foreign>, § 87, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Donatists, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Donnet, Card., § <ref target='Section_190_Para_3'>190, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doré, Gustav, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doring, Matt., § 113, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dormitoria</foreign>, § 38, 2; 60, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorner, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_10'>182, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorotheus, § 30, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dort, Synod of, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dositheus of Samaria, § 25, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Jerusalem, § <ref target='Section_152_Para_3'>152, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drabricius, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_9'>163, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dragonnades, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drake, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drey, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Druids, § 77, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drummond, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drusius, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Druthmar, Christ., § 90, 4, 9; 91, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dualism, § 26, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dualistic Heretics, § 71.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dubois, Pet. v., § 118, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Card., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ducange, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duchoborzians, § <ref target='Section_166_Para_2'>166, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_210_Para_3'>210, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dufay, § 115, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dufresne, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dulignon, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_8'>163, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dumont, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_7'>200, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dumoulin, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dungal, § 92, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunin, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>193, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duns Scotus, § 113, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dunstan, § 97, 4; 100, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dupanloup, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_203_Para_3'>203, 3-5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duplessis-Mornay, § 139, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duræus, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durandus of Osca, § 108, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    William, § 113, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dürer, Albert, § 115, 13; 142, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Durousseaux, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_7'>200, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Düsselthal, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dutoit, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_9'>171, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duvergier, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eadbald, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eanfled, § 77, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eardley, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_2'>178, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easter-Festival, § 37, 1; 56, 3, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Reckoning of, § 56, 3; 77, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Friesland, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_3'>170, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East Indies, § 64, 4; 150, 1; 155, 11; <ref target='Section_165_Para_3'>165, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_168_Para_6'>168, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_184_Para_5'>184, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebed Jesu, § 72, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebel, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_3'>176, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eber, Paul, § 141, 10; 142, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eberhard of Bamberg, § 102, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    J. A., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>171, 4-7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Bishop of Treves, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>197, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eberlin, § 125, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebionites, § 28, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebner, § 114, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ebo of Rheims, § 80; 87, 3.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='504'/><anchor id='Pg504'/>

<lg>
<l>Ebrard, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_16'>182, 16</ref>; <ref target='Section_195_Para_5'>195, 5</ref>; 5, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecbert of Schönau, § 107, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eccart, John, § 142, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ecclesia Christi</foreign> Bull, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>203, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecclesiastical Titles Bill, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_11'>202, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecetæ, § 70, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Echter, Jul., § 151, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Echternach Procession, <ref target='Section_188_Para_11'>188, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eck, § 122, 1, 4; 123, 1; 130, 6; 135, 2, 3; 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eckhart, Meister, § 114, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ecthesis, § 52, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edelmann, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_3'>171, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edessa, School of, § 31, 1; 47, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edward VI. of England, § 139, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edwin, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egbert, § 77, 8; 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egede, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egli, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_3'>199, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eichhorn, J. G., § 176, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Minister, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_2'>196, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Nich., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_5'>174, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eichsfeld, § 151, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Einhard, § 88, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>εἰρήνη, § 39, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eisenach, Conference at, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_2'>172, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Attentat, § <ref target='Section_194_Para_2'>194, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eisenmenger, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eisleben, Magister, § 141, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elagabalus, § 22, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleesban, § 64, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleutherus, § 40, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elias of Cortona, § 98.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eligius, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elipandus, § 91, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elisæus, § 64, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elizabeth, St., § 105, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Brandenburg, § 128, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Calenberg, § 134, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  England, § 139, 6-8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Herford, § 163, <ref target='Section_163_Para_7'>7</ref>, <ref target='Section_163_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Schönau, § 104, 9; 107, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elizabeth-Society, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_4'>186, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elkesaites, § 28, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eller, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elliot, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_7'>162, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eltz, Jac. v., § 151, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elvenich, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_1'>191, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elvira, Syn. of, § 38, 3; 45, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elxai, § 27, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elzevir, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emanation, § 26, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emancipation Bill, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_9'>202, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emmerau, § 78, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emmerich, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_3'>188, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Empaytaz, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_5'>199, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emser, Jerome, § 123, 4; 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Encratites, § 27, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Encyclicon, § 52, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Encyclopædists, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>165, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Endemic Synods, § 43, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Energumens, § 35, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Enfans sans souci</foreign>, § 115, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enfantin, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_2'>212, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>England, § 139, 4; 143, 1; <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_155'>155</ref>; <ref target='Section_162_Para_1'>162, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_202'>202</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ennodius, § 46, 8; 59, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enoch, Book of, § 32, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enraght, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_3'>202, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eoban, St., § 78, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epaon, Council of, § 76, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ephesus, Council of, § 52, 3; 53, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ephraem, § 47, 13; 48, 7; 59, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epigonus, § 33, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epiphanes, § 27, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epiphanius, § 47, 10; 51, 2, 3; 57, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Episcopal System, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_5'>167, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Episcopi in partibus</foreign>, § 97, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Episcopius, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Epistolæ decretales</foreign>, § 46, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>formatæ</foreign>, § 34, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>obscur. vir.</foreign>, § 120, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>paschales</foreign>, § 34, 6; 56, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>synodales</foreign>, § 34, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Epulæ Thyesteæ</foreign>, § 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erasmus, § 120, 6; 123, 3; 125, 3.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='505'/><anchor id='Pg505'/>

<lg>
<l>Erastianism, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_7'>202, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erastus, § 117, 4; 144, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erfurt, University of, § 120, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eric of Calenberg, § 136, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  "  Sweden, § 80, 1; 93, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  St., § 93, 3, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  the Red, § 93, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erigena, § 90, 7; 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erimbert, § 81, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erlembald, § 97, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ernest the Pious, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_6'>160, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Lüneburg, § 126, 4; 127, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ernesti, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>171, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ernestine Bible, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_6'>160, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esch, John, § 128, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eschenmayer, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_2'>176, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Escobar, § 149, 16; <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Essenes, § 8, 4; 28, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Essenius, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_5'>161, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Established Church, § 139, 6; <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>202, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonia, § 93, 2; <ref target='Section_205_Para_3'>205, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Estius, § 150, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelberga, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelbert, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethelwold, Bishop, § 100, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Etherius of Osma, § 91, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethiopia, § 64, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Etshmiadzin, § 72, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Εὐχαριστία, § 17, 7; 36, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Εὐχέλαιον, § 61, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eucherius, § 47, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euchites, § 44, 7; 71, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eudocia, § 48, 5; 52, 3, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eudoxia, § 51, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eudoxius, § 50, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eugenius II., § 82, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., § 96, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., § 67, 6; 110, 8, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eulalius, § 46, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euler, § 150, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eulogies, § 58, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eulogius of Cæsarea, § 53, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Cordova, § 81, 1; 90, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eunapius, § 42, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eunomius, § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphemites, § 42, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphrates, § 28, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euric, § 76, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebians, § 50, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebius of Cæsarea, § 36, 8; 47, 2; 50, 1; 59, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Doryläum, § 52, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Emesa, § 47, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Nicomedia, § 50, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Vercelli, § 50, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eustasius of Luxeuil, § 78, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eustathians, § 44, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eustathius of Antioch, § 50, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Sebaste, § 44, 3, 7; 62, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Thessalonica, § 68, 5; 70, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euthalius, § 59, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euthymius Zigabenus, § 68, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eutyches, § 52, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euzoius, § 50, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evagrius, § 5, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evangelical-Party, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>202, 1</ref>, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evangelists, § 17, 5; 34, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Evangelium æternum</foreign>, § 108, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evolutionists, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ewald, The black and white, § 78, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    H., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_3'>182, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exarchate, § 46, 9; 76, 7; 82, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exarchs, Episcopal, § 46, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Execrabilis</foreign>, § 110, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exemption, § 98.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exercises, Spiritual, § 149, 9; <ref target='Section_188_Para_1'>188, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Excommunication, § 35, 2; 88, 5; 106, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exodus-Churches, § 211, <ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_211_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>ἐξομολόγησις, § 32, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exorcism, § 35, 4; 58, 1; 142, 2; <ref target='Section_167_Para_2'>167, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='506'/><anchor id='Pg506'/>

<lg>
<l>Exorcists, § 33, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Exsurge Domini</foreign>, § 123, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Extra</foreign>, § 99, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Extraneæ</foreign>, § 39, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Extravagantes</foreign>, § 99, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eyck, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eznik, § 64, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezra, Fourth Book of, § 32, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faber, John, § 130, 2, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Stapulensis, § 120, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fabian, Bishop of Rome, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Facundus of Hermiane, § 47, 19; 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fagius, § 139, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Falk, Dr., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_8'>174, 8</ref>; 193, <ref target='Section_193_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_193_Para_6'>6</ref>; 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Familists, § 146, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farel, § 130, 3; 138, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fasts, Ascetic, § 44, 4; 107.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Ecclesiastical, § 37, 3; 56, 4, 7; 115, 1, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fatak, § 29, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faustus of Mileve, § 54, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Rhegium, § 47, 21; 53, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Favre, Pet., § 149, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fawkes, Guy, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fazy, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_1'>199, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Febronius, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fecht, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_1'>167, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Federal Theology, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_4'>161, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felicissimus, § 41, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felicitas, § 22, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felix, II., § 46, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., § 46, 8; 52, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., § 46, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    V., § 110, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Aptunga, § 63, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Manichæan, § 54, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Pratensis, § 120, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Urgellis, § 91, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fell, Marg., § <ref target='Section_163_Para_4'>163, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feneberg, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_1'>187, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fénelon, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fenian-movement, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_10'>202, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferdinand I., § 137, 8; 126, 2, 3; 139, 19, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II., § 151, 1; <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     VII. of Spain, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_1'>205, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     I. of Castile, § 95, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     III. of Castile, § 95, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     the Catholic, § 95, 2; 117, 2; 118, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferguson, Fergus, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_8'>202, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferrara, Council of, § 67, 6; 110, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferrer, Bonif., § 115, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Vincent, § 115, 2; 110, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ferry, Minister, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_6'>203, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ferula</foreign>, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fessler, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Ign., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_13'>165, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feudalism, § 86, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feuerbach, § 174, <ref target='Section_174_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>3</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_6'>182, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feuillants, § 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feyin, Synod of, § 64, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fichte, J. G., § 170, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    J. H., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_15'>211, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiesole, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fifth Monarchy Men, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_1'>162, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Filioque</foreign>, § 50, 7; 67, 1; 91, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finkenstein, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_3'>176, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finland, § 93, 11; 139, 1; <ref target='Section_206_Para_3'>206, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firmian, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>165, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firmcius Maternus, § 47, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firmilian, § 34, 3; 35, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fischart, § 142, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fisher, Bishop, § 139, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fisherman's Ring, § 110, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fitzgerald, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Five Mile Act, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>155, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flacius, § 141, 4-8; 142, 6; 5, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flagellants, § 106, 4; 116, 3; 149, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flagellation, § 106, 4; 116, 3; 149, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flavia Domitilla, § 22, 1.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='507'/><anchor id='Pg507'/>

<lg>
<l>Flavian of Antioch, § 50, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Constantinople, § 52, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flechier, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flemming, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fletcher, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_3'>169, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fleury, § 5, 2; <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fliedner, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flora, § 27, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florence, Council of, § 67, 6; 72; 110, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florentius Radewin, § 112, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florinus, § 31, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Florus Magister, § 90, 5; 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Folmar, § 102, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fontevraux, Order of, § 98, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fools, Festival of, § 105, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Formosus, § 82, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Formula Concordiæ</foreign>, § 141, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Consensus Helvet., § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Förster, J., § 142, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   prelate, § 118, 3; <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>197, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fortunatus, § 48, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fouque, de la M., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_5'>174, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fourier, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_1'>212, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fox, George, Quaker, § 163, <ref target='Section_163_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_163_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  American Spiritualist, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_17'>211, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>France, § 139, 13-17; <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_165_Para_5'>165, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Francis, St., § 93, 16; 98, 3; 104, 10; 106, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     de Paula, § 112, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Sales, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_6'>156, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_1'>157, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     I., of France, § 110, 9, 14; 120, 8; 126, 5, 6; 139, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II., of France, § 139, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Francisca Romana, § 112, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franciscans, § 98, 3; 112, 2; 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Francis Xavier Society, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_4'>186, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franck, Seb. § 146, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   John, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Michael, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Sal., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Francke, A. H., § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>; 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>8</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>9</ref>; <ref target='Section_160_Para_7'>160, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franco of Cologne, § 144, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frank, J. H., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_15'>182, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frankists, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_17'>165, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franks, The, § 76, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frankfort, Synod of, § 91, 1; 92, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Concordat of, § 110, 9, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Parliament of, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_4'>189, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Recess of, § 141, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Troubles of, § 134, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fratres de communi vita</foreign>, § 112, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>minores</foreign>, § 98, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pontifices</foreign>, § 98, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>praedicatores</foreign>, § 98, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Fraticelli</foreign>, § 112, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fredigis, § 90, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frederick I., Barbarossa, § 96, 14, 15; 94, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II., Emperor, § 94, 5; 96, 20; 97, 2; 99, 3; 109, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     III., Emperor, § 110, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     III., of Austin, § 110, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     I., of Prussia, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II.,     "      § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>171, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     I., of Denmark, § 139, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     IV.,     "      § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Palatinate, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Aug. the Strong, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>153, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     the Wise, § 122, 3; 123, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     William, the Great Elector, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     William II., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_5'>171, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"        "    III., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_5'>171, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_172_Para_3'>172, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_177_Para_1'>177, 1</ref>; 193.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"        "    IV., § <ref target='Section_177_Para_2'>177, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_193'>193</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freemasons, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_2'>171, 2</ref>; 104, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Free-will Baptists, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_3'>162, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Free-thinkers, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_2'>164, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_171_Para_2'>171, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freiligrath, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_5'>174, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='508'/><anchor id='Pg508'/>

<lg>
<l>Fresenius, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>167, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freylinghausen, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6-8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fricke, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_21'>182, 21</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fridolin, § 77, 7; 78, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friedewalt, Convention of, § 126, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friedrich, John, § <ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>190, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fries, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_1'>174, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frisians, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frith, § 139, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frithigern, § 76, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fritzlar, § 78, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fritzsche, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_3'>183, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frobenius, § 120, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frohschammer, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Froment, § 138, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fronto, § 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frumentius, § 64, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fry, Elizabeth, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fugue, Musical, § 115, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulbert of Chartres, § 101, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulco, Canonist, § 102, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Neuilly, § 104, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulda, § 78, 5; 151, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulgentius, Ferr., § 47, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       of Ruspe, § 47, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gabler, Andr., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_6'>182, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Th. A., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_5'>171, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gabriel, Didymus, § 124, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galen, § 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galerius, § 22, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galileo, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_4'>156, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gall, St., § 130, 4, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galle, Peter, § 139, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallienus, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallican Church, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_3'>156, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_203'>203</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallizin, Am. v., § <ref target='Section_172_Para_2'>172, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallus, St., § <ref target='Section_178'>178</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Emperor, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ganganelli, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_8'>165, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gangra, Synod of, § 44, 7; 45, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardiner, Allen, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_2'>184, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Bishop, § 139, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garibaldi, <ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>185, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garve, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gasparin, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_4'>203, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gannilo, § 101, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gauzbert, § 81, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gavazzi, § <ref target='Section_204_Para_4'>204, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gebhardt of Eichstedt, § 96, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Cologne, § 137, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Salzburg, § 97, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gedike, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>154, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gedimin, § 93, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geibel, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_6'>174, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geier, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geiler of Kaisersb., § 115, 2, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geisa, § 93, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geismar, § 78, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geissel, § <ref target='Section_194_Para_1'>194, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gelasius, I., § 46, 8; 47, 22; 59, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      II., § 96, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gelimar, § 76, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gellert, § 176, 11; <ref target='Section_172_Para_1'>172, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genesis, The little, § 32, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genesius, § 71, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geneva, § 138; 199, <ref target='Section_199_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_199_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_199_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genghis-Khan, § 72, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gennadius, § 47, 16; 48, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Patr., § 68, 5; 67, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genseric, § 76, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gentile Christians, § 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gentilis, § 148, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gentilly, Synod of, § 91, 2; 92, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Genuflectentes</foreign>, § 35, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>George Acyndynos, § 69, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Brandenburg, § 127, 3; 132, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Saxony, § 122, 4; 126, 5; 128; 134, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Bishop of the Arabs, § 72, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Trebizond, § 68, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerbert, § 96, 2; 100, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gereuth, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_6'>188, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerhard Groot, § 112, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    John, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Segarelli, § 108, 8.</l>
<pb n='509'/><anchor id='Pg509'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Zerbolt, § 112, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerhardt, Paul, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerike, P., § 139, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerlach, L. v., § <ref target='Section_175_Para_1'>175, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Otto v., § <ref target='Section_181_Para_4'>181, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Stephen, § 139, 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Germains, Peace of, § 139, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>German Empire, § <ref target='Section_192'>192</ref>; <ref target='Section_197'>197</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Catholics, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_6'>187, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germany, Young, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_5'>174, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germanus, Patr., § 66, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gerson, § 110, 6, 7; 112, 6; 113, 3; 118, 4; 119, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gertrude the Great, § 107, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Hackeborn, § 107, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gesenius, W., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_3'>182, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Just., § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gewilib of Mainz, § 78, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geysa, § 93, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gfrörer, § 5, 4; <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghazali, § 103, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghent, Pacific. of, § 139, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghetto, § 95, 3; <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghiberti, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gichtel, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_9'>163, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gieseler, § 5, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giessen, University of, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_1'>154, 1</ref>; 196, <ref target='Section_196_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_196_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gil, Juan, § 129, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilbertines, § 98, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilbertus Porretanus, § 102, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gildas, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giotto, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gisela, § 93, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gladstone, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_10'>202, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glass, Painting on, § 104, 14; <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glassius, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γλωσσαῖς λαλεῖν, § 17, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnesen, Archbishopric of, § 93, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnosimachians, § 62, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnosticism, § 18, 3; 26-28.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goar, St., § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gobat, Bishop, § 184, <ref target='Section_184_Para_8'>8</ref>, <ref target='Section_184_Para_9'>9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gobel, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goch, John of, § 119, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, Friends of, § 116, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Godfrey of Bouillon, § 94, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Strassburg, § 105, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goethe, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goetze, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gomarus, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gonzago, Cardinal, § 149, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gonzalo of Berceo, § 105, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good Friday, § 56, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goodwin, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gordianus, § 22, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Görg, Junker, § 123, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gorm the Old, § 93, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Görres, Jos., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_4'>174, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_181_Para_1'>181, 1</ref>; 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Göschel, § 179, <ref target='Section_179_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_179_Para_2'>2</ref>; 182, <ref target='Section_182_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_182_Para_15'>15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gossler, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_6'>193, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_11'>197, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gossner, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_2'>187, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>184, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gothic Architecture, § 104, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goths, § 76.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gotter, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gottschalk, Prince of Wends, § 93, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Monk, § 91, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goudimel, § 143, 2; 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grabau, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_2'>208, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grabow, § 210, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graf, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_18'>182, 18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Graffiti</foreign>, § 38, 1; 39, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>γράμματα τετυπωμένα, § 34, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grammont, Order of, § 98, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grant, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_9'>184, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Granvella, § 135, 1, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gratian, Emperor, § 42, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Canonist, § 99, 5; 104, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gratius Ortuinus, § 120, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graumann, § 142, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grebel, § 130, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greece, § 207.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greeks, United, § 151; <ref target='Section_206_Para_2'>206, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Green, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_3'>202, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greenland, § 93, 1; <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_184_Para_2'>184, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregentius, § 48, 3.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='510'/><anchor id='Pg510'/>

<lg>
<l>Gregoire, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory I., § 46, 10; 47, 22; 57, 4; 58, 3; 59, 5, 6, 9; 61, 4; 76, 8; 77, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., III., § 66, 1; 78, 4; 82, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., § 82, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    V., § 96, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    VI., § 96, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    VII., § 96, 7-9; 94; 101, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    VIII., § 96, 16; 94, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IX., § 96, 19; 99, 4; 109, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    X., § 96, 21; 67, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    XI., § 110, 5; 114, 4; 117, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    XII., § 110, 6, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    XIII., § 139, 17; 149, 3, 4, 17.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    XIV., § 149, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    XV., § 156, <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    XVI., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Abulfarajus, § 72, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Acindynos, § 69, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Constantinople, § <ref target='Section_207_Para_1'>207, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Heimburg, § 118, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Illuminator, § 64, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Palamas, § 69, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Scholaris, § 68, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Thaumaturgus, § 31, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Nazianzen, § 47, 4; 48, 5, 8; 59, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Nyssa, § 47, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Tours, § 90, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Utrecht, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregorian Chant, § 59, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gretna-Green, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_6'>202, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grévy, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_5'>203, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grey, Lady Jane, § 139, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Griesbach, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_7'>171, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Groot, Gerh., § 112, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gropper, § 135, 3, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grosseteste, § 97, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grotius, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>; 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gruber, § 170, <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_170_Para_2'>2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gruet, Jac., § 138, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grundtvig, § <ref target='Section_201_Para_1'>201, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grunthler, § 139, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grynäus, § 133, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gualbertus, § 98, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guardian, § 98, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guatemala, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_2'>209, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guelphs, § 96, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guericke, § 5, 5; <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_177_Para_2'>177, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_13'>182, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guerin, § 98, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guevara, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_2'>209, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guiana, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_2'>184, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guibert, Archbishop, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_5'>203, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Nogent, § 101, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guido of Arezzo, § 104, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   de Castello, § 102, 2; 108, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Siena, § 104, 9, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guigo, § 98, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guise, Dukes of, § 139, 13-17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guizot, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>185, 3</ref>; 203, <ref target='Section_203_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_203_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gundiberge, § 76, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gundioch, § 75, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gundobald, § 76, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gundulf, § 108, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gunpowder Plot, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gunthamund, § 76, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gunther of Cologne, § 82, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Günther, Ant., § <ref target='Section_191_Para_3'>191, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Cyriacus, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Günzburg, Eberlin of, § 125, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gury, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_9'>191, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gustavus Adolphus, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_160_Para_7'>160, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"        "     Society, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_1'>178, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gützlaf, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_6'>184, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guyon, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gylas, § 93, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gyrovagi, § 44, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haag, Pastor, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_3'>196, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='511'/><anchor id='Pg511'/>

<lg>
<l>Haas, Jos., § <ref target='Section_210_Para_2'>210, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Charles, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haco the Good, § 93, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadrian, Emperor, § 28, 3; 25; 39, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadrian I., § 66, 3; 82, 2; 91, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., § 67, 1; 79, 2; 82, 7; 83, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., § 82, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., § 96, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    V., § 96, 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    VI., § 149, 1; 126, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hagenau, § 135, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hagenbach, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_9'>182, 9</ref>; 5, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hahn, Aug., § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Michael, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_3'>172, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Missionary, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_3'>184, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hahn-Hahn, Ida, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hakem, § 95, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haldane, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_5'>199, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haldanites, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_6'>170, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halle, University of, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_1'>167, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haller, Alb., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Berth., § 130, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     L. v., § <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamann, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamburg, Bishopric, § 80, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamilton, Patrick, § 139, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hammerschmidt, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_5'>160, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Handel, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_7'>167, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haneberg, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_4'>189, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>197, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanne, Dr., § <ref target='Section_180_Para_3'>180, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hannington, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_4'>184, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanover, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_8'>193, 8</ref>; <ref target='Section_194_Para_3'>194, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hans, Brother, § 115, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harald the Apostate, § 80.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Blaatand, § 93, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hardenberg, § 144, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hard-Shell Baptists, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_6'>170, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hardouin, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_11'>165, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hare, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_17'>211, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harless, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_13'>182, 13</ref>; <ref target='Section_195_Para_4'>195, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harmonites, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>211, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harmonius, § 27, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harms, Claus, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Louis, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>184, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harnack, Th., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_13'>182, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartmann, E. v., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hase, § 5, 4; <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_5'>182, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hasse, § 5, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hassun, § <ref target='Section_207_Para_4'>207, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hattemists, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_8'>170, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hatto of Reichenau, § 90, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   I. of Mainz, § 83, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hatty-Humayun, § <ref target='Section_207'>207</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hätzer, § 130, 5; 148, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haug, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hauge, § <ref target='Section_201_Para_3'>201, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hauser, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_5'>188, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hausmann, Nich., § 133, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hausrath, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_17'>182, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haydn, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_10'>174, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haymo of Halberstadt, § 90, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebel, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heber, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_5'>184, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebræans, Sect of, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_8'>170, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrews, Gospel of the, § 31, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heddo of Strassburg, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hedinger, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hedio, § 130, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hedwig of Poland, § 93, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    St. of Silesia, § 105, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heermann, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hefele, § 189, <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_189_Para_4'>4</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hefter, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_8'>184, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hegel, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_1'>174, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hegesippus, § 31, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hegius, § 120, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heidanus, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heidegger, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heidelberg Catechism, § 144, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       University, § 120, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heine, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_5'>174, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heinrichs, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_5'>171, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hejira, § 65.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Held, H., § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Imperial Orator, § 134, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helding, § 136, 5.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='512'/><anchor id='Pg512'/>

<lg>
<l>Helena, Empress, § 57, 5, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Russia, § 73, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliand, § 89, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hell, § 106, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hellenists, § 10, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helmstedt, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_2'>159, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heloise, § 102, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helvetius, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>165, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helvidius, § 62, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hemero-baptists, § 25, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hemmerlin, § 118, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hemming of Upsala, § 93, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Professor, § 141, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hengstenberg, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_4'>182, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henke, § 5, 3; <ref target='Section_171_Para_7'>171, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henoticon, § 52, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henricians, § 108, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henry I., Emperor, § 93, 2; 96, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II., § 96, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   III., § 96, 4; 97, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   IV., § 96, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   V., § 96, 11 ff.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   VI., § 96, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   VII., § 110, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   I. of England, § 96, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II.     "      § 96, 16; 94, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   VIII.   "      § 125, 3; 139, 4, 7, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II. of France, § 139, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   III.     "     § 139, 17, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   IV.      "     § 139, 17.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Brunswick, § 126, 5; 135, 6, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Saxony, § 134, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   <foreign rend='italic'>de Hessia</foreign>, § 118, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Langenstein, § 118, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Lausanne, § 108, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Nördlingen, § 114, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Upsala, § 93, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Lion, § 93, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Wendish Prince, § 93, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Zütphen, § 128, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hensel, Louise, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_6'>174, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heppe, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_3'>170, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_16'>182, 16</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heracleon, § 27, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heraclius, § 52, 8; 57, 5; 64, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herbart, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herder, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heretic's Baptism, § 35, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hergenröther, § 5, 6; <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heriger, § 80, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermann von Fritzlar, § 114.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Premonstrat., § 95, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Cologne, § 133, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     von Wied, § 133, 5; 135, 7; 136, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermannsburg, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>184, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_193_Para_8'>193, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermas, § 30, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermes, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_1'>191, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermias, § 30, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermogenes, § 27, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herrero de Mora, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_5'>205, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herrmann, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_20'>182, 20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herrnhut, § <ref target='Section_168'>168</ref>; <ref target='Section_169_Para_3'>169, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hervæus, § 102, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herzog, Old Catholic Bishop, § <ref target='Section_190_Para_3'>190, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_199_Para_3'>199, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Prelate, § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_10'>10</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_11'>11</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     J. J., § 5, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hess, J. Jac., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>171, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hesse, § 127, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Darmstadt, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_4'>196, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_15'>197, 15</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Cassel, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_1'>154, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_193_Para_9'>193, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_194_Para_4'>194, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hesshus, § 144, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hesychasts, § 69, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Hetæræ</foreign>, § 22, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hettinger, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heubner, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_5'>184, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heumann, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hexapla, § 31, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hibbert Trust, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_4'>202, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hicks, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_3'>211, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hieracas, § 39, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierocles, § 23, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hieronomites, § 112, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>High-Churchmen, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>202, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='513'/><anchor id='Pg513'/>

<lg>
<l>Hilarion, § 44, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilary of Arles, § 46, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Poitiers, § 47, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hildebert of Tours, § 101, 1; 104, 4, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hildebrand, § 96, 4 ff.; 101, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hildegard, § 97; 107, 1; 109.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilderic, § 76, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilduin, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilgenfeld, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_7'>182, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilgers, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hiller, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hinemar of Laon, § 83, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Rheims, § 82, 7; 83, 2; 87, 3; 90, 5; 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippolytus, § 31, 3; 33, 5; 40, 2; 41, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hirschberger Bible, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>167, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hirscher, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>187, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hitzig, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_3'>182, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hobbes, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_3'>164, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoe v. Hoenegg, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_159_Para_1'>159, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hofacker, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_4'>211, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoffmann, Christ., § <ref target='Section_211_Para_8'>211, 8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Fr., § <ref target='Section_191_Para_2'>191, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      G. W., § <ref target='Section_196_Para_5'>196, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Melch., § 147, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Chr. K. v., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_14'>182, 14</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Dan., § 141, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hofmeister, Seb., § 130, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hofstede de Groot, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>200, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hohenlohe, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_2'>188, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Card., § <ref target='Section_189_Para_1'>189, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_7'>197, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holbach, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>165, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holbein, § 115, 6, 13; 113, 5; 142, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holland, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>; 200, <ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_200_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hollaz, § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holtzmann, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_17'>182, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homberg, Synod of, § 127, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homoians, § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homoiousians, § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homologoumena, § 36, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homoousians, § 33, 1; 50, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hönigern, § <ref target='Section_177_Para_2'>177, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honorius, Emperor, § 42, 4; 53, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      I., § 46, 11; 52, 8, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      II., § 96, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      III., § 96, 19.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      IV., § 96, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honter, Jac., § 139, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hontheim, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hoogstraten, § 120, 4; 122, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hooper, § 139, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hormisdas of Rome, § 46, 8; 52, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horsley, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hosius, Bishop, § 50, 1, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Cardinal, § 139, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hospinian, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hospital Brothers, § 98, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hossbach, § <ref target='Section_180_Para_4'>180, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Host, § 104, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Höting, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_10'>197, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hottinger, § 5, 2; <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Howard, Catherine, § 139, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huber, J., § <ref target='Section_189_Para_1'>189, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>190, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Sam., § 141, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hubmeier, § 130, 5; 147, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huebald, § 104, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huetius, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hug, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_8'>191, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hugh Capet, § 96, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huguenots, § 139, 14 ff.; <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>; 166, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hugo a St. Caro, § 103, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of St. Victor, § 102, 4; 104, 2, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Hugo de Payens</foreign>, § 98, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hülsemann, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_159_Para_2'>159, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humanists, § 120.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humbert, § 67, 3; 101, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humboldt, Alex. v., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hume, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humiliates, § 98, 7; 101, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hundeshagen, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_3'>196, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hungary, § 93, 8; 139, 20; <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_198_Para_6'>198, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='514'/><anchor id='Pg514'/>

<lg>
<l>Hunneric, § 76, 3; 54, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunnius, Ægid., § 141, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Nich., § <ref target='Section_159_Para_5'>159, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huntingdon, Lady, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_3'>169, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hupfeld, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_3'>182, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_194_Para_4'>194, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurter, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_1'>175, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Husig, § 64, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huss, § 113, 7; 119, 3-6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hutten, Ulr. v., § 120, 2, 3; 122, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hy, § 77, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyacinth, § 93, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hylists, Anc. Materialists, § 26, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hymn Music, § 142, 3; <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_180_Para_1'>180, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hymnology, § 17, 7; 36, 10; 59, 4; 89, 2; 104, 10; 115, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hymns, Catholic, § 149, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Protestant, § 142, 3; 143, 2; <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_162_Para_6'>162, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_175_Para_10'>175, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hypatia, § 42, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyperius, § 143, 5; <ref target='Section_154_Para_1'>154, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hypophonic singing, § 59, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hypostasianism, § 33, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hypsistarians, § 42, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hystaspes, § 32, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iamblichus, § 24, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibas, § 47, 13; 52, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iberians, § 64, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Icarians, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_3'>212, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iceland, § 93, 5; 139, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idacius, § 54, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iglesia Española, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_4'>205, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignatius of Antioch, § 22, 2; 30, 5; 34, 1, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Patr. of Constant., § 67, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignatius Loyola, § 149, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ignorantins</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>165, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ijejasu, § 150, 2; <ref target='Section_156_Para_11'>156, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ildefonsus, § 90, 2, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illuminati, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_11'>165, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illyria, § 46, 5, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Images, § 38, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Controversy about, § 66; 92, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Image-worship, § 57, 4; 89, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immaculate Conception, § 104, 7; 112, 4; 113, 2; 149, 13; <ref target='Section_156_Para_6'>156, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immanuel Synod, § <ref target='Section_177_Para_3'>177, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immunity, § 84, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Impostores tres</foreign>, § 148, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incense, § 59, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Inclusi</foreign>, § 85, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In Cœna Domini</foreign>, § 117, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In commendam</foreign>, § 86, 5; 110, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Independents, § 143, 4; <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_162_Para_1'>162, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Index prohibitorius</foreign>, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indulgences, § 106, 2; 117, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ineffabilis</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In eminenti</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infallibility, § 96, 23; 110, 14; 149, 4; <ref target='Section_165_Para_8'>165, 8</ref>; <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infant Baptism, § 35, 3; 58, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infralapsarianism, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_1'>161, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Infula</foreign>, § 84, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inge, § 93, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingolstadt, § 120, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Innocentum festum</foreign>, § 57, 1; 105, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Innocent I., § 46, 5; 51, 3; 53, 4; 61, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II., § 96, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     III., § 96, 17, 18; 94, 4; 102, 9; 108, 10; 109, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     IV., § 96, 20; 72, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     V., § 96, 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     VI., § 110, 4, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     VII., § 110, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     VIII., § 110, 11; 115, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     IX., § 149, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     X., § <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>156, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     XI., § 156, <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_3'>3</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>157, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     XII., § 156, <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_3'>3</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     XIII., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_1'>165, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In partibus infidelium</foreign>, § 97, 3.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='515'/><anchor id='Pg515'/>

<lg>
<l>Inquisition, § 109, 2; 117, 2; 139, 22; 149, 2; 151; <ref target='Section_156_Para_3'>156, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inspiration, Doctrine of, § 36, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Insula sanctorum</foreign>, § 77, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intentionalism, § 149, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Interdict, § 106, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Interim, The Augsburg, § 136, 5, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Leipzig, § 136, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Regensburg, § 135, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>International, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_4'>212, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Interpreters, § 34, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Investiture, § 45, 1; 84; 96, 7, 11, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iona, § 77, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland, § 77, 1; 139, 7; <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_9'>202, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irenæus, § 31, 2; 33, 9; 34, 8; 40, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irene, § 66, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irish Massacre, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irvingites, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaac, the Great, § 64, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Antioch, § 48, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isabella of Castile, § 95, 2; 117, 2; 118, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II. of Spain, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_2'>205, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isenberg, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_9'>184, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isidore the Gnostic, § 28, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Pelusium, § 47, 6; 44, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Presbyter, § 51, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Russ. Metropol., § 73.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Seville, § 90, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Islam, § 65; 81; 95.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Issy, Conference of, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Itala</foreign>, § 36, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, § 139, 22; 189, 7; <ref target='Section_204'>204</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ithacius, § 54, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ivo of Chartres, § 99, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jablonsky, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_3'>168, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacob el Baradai, § 52, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Basilicus, § 139, 26.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   a Benedictis, § 104, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Brescia, § 112, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   ben Chajim, § 120, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Conqueror, § 95.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Edessa, § 47, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Harkh, § 71, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Jüterbegk, § 118, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Maerlant, § 105, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Marchia, § 112, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Misa, § 119, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Nisibis, § 47, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Sarug, § 48, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacobi, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_10'>171, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacobini, § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_9'>9</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_12'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacobites, § 52, 7; 72, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jacopone da Todi, § 104, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jaldabaoth, § 27, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James the Just, § 16, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   V. of Scotland, § 139, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   I. of England, § 117, 4; 139, 11; <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II. of England, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>155, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   III. of Baden, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>153, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Molay, § 112, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   a Voragine, § 104, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jansen, Cornel., § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jansenists, § 157, 15; <ref target='Section_165_Para_6'>165, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Januarius, St., § <ref target='Section_188_Para_10'>188, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Janus, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_1'>189, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japan, § 150, 2; <ref target='Section_156_Para_11'>156, 11</ref>; <ref target='Section_184_Para_6'>184, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_186_Para_7'>186, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jaroslaw I., § 72, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II., § 73, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jason and Papiscus, § 30, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Java, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_5'>184, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jay, le, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jazelich, § 52, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jena, Univ. of, § 141, 1, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeremias II., § 73, 4; 139, 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerome, § 17, 6; 33, 9; 47, 16; 48, 1; 51, 2; 53, 4; 59, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Prague, § 119, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, Bishopric, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_8'>184, 8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Church of the New, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='516'/><anchor id='Pg516'/>

<lg>
<l>Jesuates, § 112, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jesuits, § 149, 8-12; 150; 151; <ref target='Section_156_Para_2'>156, 2-9</ref>; 157, <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>5</ref>; <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7-9</ref>; <ref target='Section_186_Para_1'>186, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_4'>197, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_199_Para_1'>199, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jewish Christians, § 18; 28; <ref target='Section_211_Para_9'>211, 9</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Missions, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_184_Para_8'>184, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews in Middle Ages, § 90, 9; 95, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joachim of Floris, § 108, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Brandenburg, § 128, 1; 134, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II. of Brandenburg, § 134, 5; 136, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joan of Arc, § 116, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joanna, Popess, § 82, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Valois, § 112, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John I., Pope, § 46, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  VIII. and IX., § 82, 8; 79, 2; 67, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  X., XII., XIII., § 96, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  XIV., XV., XVI., § 96, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  XVII., XVIII., § 96, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  XIX., § 96, 4; 57, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  XXI., § 96, 22; 82, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  XXII., § 110, 3; 112, 2; 113, 1; 114, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  XXIII., § 110, 7; 119, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  the Constant, § 124, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Frederick, the Magnanimous, § 133, 2; 136, 3; 137, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Lackland, § 96, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  VII. of Portugal, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_4'>205, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Sigismund, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>154, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  the Apostle, § 16, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Antioch, § 52, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Beccos, § 67, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Capistrano, § 112, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   " Climacus, § 47, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   " the Cross, § 49, 6, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   " Damascus, § 66, 1; 68, 2-5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   " Ephesus, § 5, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   " God, § 149, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   " Hagen, § 112, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   " Jandun, § 118, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Jejunator, § 46, 10; 61, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Leyden, § 133, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  de Monte Corvino, § 93, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Moschus, § 47, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Nepomuc, § 116, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Ozniensis, § 72, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  V., Paläologus, § 67, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  VII.,    "      § 67, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Paris, § 118, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  "  Parma, § 108, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Philoponus, § 47, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  the Presbyter, § 16, 3; 30, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Prester, § 72, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Ravenna, § 83, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  "  Salisbury, § 102, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Scholasticus, § 43, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Scotus Erigena, § 90, 7; 91, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Talaja, § 52, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Trani, § 67, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  "  Turrecremata, § 110, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Tzimiskes, § 71, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Wesel, § 119, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John, St., Festival of, § 57, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Disciples of, § 25, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Knights of, § 98, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jonas of Bobbio, § 77, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Orleans, § 90, 4; 92, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Justus, § 123, 7; 134, 5; 142, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jones, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_3'>182, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jordanes, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joris, David, § 148, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joseph, Patr., § 67, 4; 70, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   I., Emperor, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_1'>165, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>; <ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>186, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Josephus, § 10, 2; 13, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jovi, § 80, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jovinian, § 62, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juarez, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>209, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jubilee Year, § 117, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jubilees, Book of, § 32, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Jubili</foreign>, § 85, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judä, Leo, § 130, 2; 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='517'/><anchor id='Pg517'/>

<lg>
<l>Judson, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_5'>184, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julia Mammæa, § 22, 4; 31, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juliana, § 104, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julianists, § 52, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julian, Emperor, § 42, 3, 5; 63, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Eclanum, § 47, 21; 53, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Toledo, § 90, 2, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    St., § <ref target='Section_188_Para_8'>188, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>July Law, Pruss., § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_10'>10</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_11'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julius I., § 46, 3; 50, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II., § 110, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   III., § 149, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Africanus, § 31, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jumpers, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_7'>170, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jung-Stillung, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Junilius, § 48, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Junius, Fr., § 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jurieu, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Jus circa sacra</foreign>, § 43, 1; <ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>167, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primarum prec.</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_1'>165, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>regaliæ</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>156, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>spoliorum</foreign>, § 110, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justin I., § 52, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Martyr, § 30, 9; 33, 9; 36, 3, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Gnostic, § 27, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justina, St., § 48, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Empress, § 50, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justinian I., § 42, 4; 45, 2; 46, 9; 52, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II., § 46, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juvenal of Jerusalem, § 53, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juvencus, § 48, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kähler, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_3'>176, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kahnis, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_15'>182, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaiser, § 128, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaiserwerth, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamehameha, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_7'>184, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kamel, Sultan, § 94, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kanitz, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_3'>176, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kant, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_10'>171, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karaites, § 72, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kardec, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_17'>211, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karg, Controversy of, § 141, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Katerkamp, § 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaulen, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_8'>191, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keil, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_13'>182, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keim, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_17'>182, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keller, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_6'>196, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kellner, § <ref target='Section_177_Para_2'>177, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kempen, Stephen, § 125, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kempis, Thomas a, § 112, 9; 114, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kenrick, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kerner, Just., § <ref target='Section_176_Para_2'>176, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kessler, § 124, 1; 130, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ketteler, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>187, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_196_Para_1'>196, 1-4</ref>; 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_15'>15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kettler, § 139, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kierkegaard, § <ref target='Section_201_Para_1'>201, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiev, § 73, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kilian, § 78, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kings, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Three Holy, § 56, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klebitz, § 144, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klee, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kleuker, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kleutzen, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_9'>191, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kliefoth, § <ref target='Section_181_Para_3'>181, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_14'>182, 14</ref>; <ref target='Section_194_Para_6'>194, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klopstock, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knapp, A., § <ref target='Section_181_Para_1'>181, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    G. Ch., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knights, Teutonic, § 98, 8; 93, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of St. John, § 98, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knox, § 139, 9, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knutzen, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_4'>164, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kohlbrügge, § <ref target='Section_179_Para_3'>179, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kohler, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Köllner, § 5, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Königsberg, Relig. Process., § <ref target='Section_176_Para_3'>176, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Köppen, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Körner, § 141, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kornthal, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_5'>196, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krafft, § <ref target='Section_195_Para_2'>195, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kraus, Xav., § 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krüdener, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_2'>176, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_199_Para_5'>199, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='518'/><anchor id='Pg518'/>

<lg>
<l>Krummacher, G. D., § <ref target='Section_179_Para_3'>179, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       F. W., § <ref target='Section_178_Para_2'>178, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kübel, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_2'>196, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kublai-Khan, § 93, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuenen, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_20'>182, 20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuhn, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Kulturkampf,</q> German, § 197.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"         Belgian, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_5'>200, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"         French, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_6'>203, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuyper, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>200, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labadie, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_7'>163, 7</ref>, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labarum, § 22, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labrador, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_2'>184, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labyrinth, The Little, § 31, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lachat, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_3'>199, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lacordaire, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_4'>187, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_188_Para_1'>188, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lactantius, § 31, 12; 33, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ladislaus, St., § 93, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Naples, § 110, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laforce, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lainez, § 149, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laity, § 34, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamartine, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_7'>174, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lambert le Begue, § 98, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Avignon, § 127, 2; 130, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lambeth Articles, § 144, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamennais, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_4'>187, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_188_Para_1'>188, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lämmer, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lammists, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_1'>163, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lampe, § 169, <ref target='Section_169_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lancelot, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_5'>159, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Landulf, § 97, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lanfranc, § 96, 8; 101, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lang, H., § <ref target='Section_199_Para_4'>199, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lange, Joach., § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    J. Pet., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_9'>182, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Langen, Rud. v., § 120, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laplace, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lapland, § 93, 11; <ref target='Section_163_Para_4'>163, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_184_Para_2'>184, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lapsi, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lardner, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lasalle, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>165, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_212_Para_5'>212, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lasaulx, Am. v., § <ref target='Section_188_Para_4'>188, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Las Casas, § 150, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lasco, J. a, § 139, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lateran, § 110, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Synods I., § 52, 8; 96, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"        "   II., § 96, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"        "   III., § 96, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"        "   IV., § 96, 18; 101, 2; 104, 3-5; 106, 1; 109, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latimer, § 139, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latitudinarians, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latter-day Saints, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10, 12-14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laud, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurence, Martyr, § 22, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Bishop, § 46, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Archbishop, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurentius Valla, § 120, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lausanne, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_5'>196, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lauterbach, § 129, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lavater, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lay Abbots, § 85, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Brethren, § 98.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lazarists, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leade, Jane, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_9'>163, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leander of Seville, § 76, 2; 90, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lectionaries, § 33; 59, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ledochowski, § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_7'>7</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_12'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lee, Anna, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_7'>170, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Bishop, § 211, 74.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lefebvre, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_4'>188, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legates, § 96, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Legenda aurea</foreign>, § 104, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legends, § 57, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Legio fulminatrix</foreign>, § 22, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Thebaica</foreign>, § 22, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lehnin, Prophecy of, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_8'>153, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leibnitz, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_160_Para_7'>160, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_164_Para_2'>164, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leidecker, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_5'>161, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leidrad of Lyons, § 90, 3; 91, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leipzig Disputation, § 123, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Relig. Conference, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leland, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lenau, Nich. v., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_6'>174, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='519'/><anchor id='Pg519'/>

<lg>
<l>Lentulus, § 13, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo I., the Great, § 45, 2; 46, 7; 47, 22; 52, 4; 54, 1, 2; 61, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  II., § 46, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  III., § 82, 3; 91, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  IV., § 82, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  VIII., § 96, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  IX. § 67, 6; 96, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  X., § 110, 14; 121, 1; 122, 2, 3; <ref target='Section_194_Para_4'>194, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  XI., § 149, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  XII., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  XIII., § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_185_Para_5'>185, 5</ref>; 188, <ref target='Section_188_Para_8'>8</ref>, <ref target='Section_188_Para_9'>9</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_12'>191, 12</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_9'>197, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_200_Para_5'>200, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_203_Para_6'>203, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Achrida, § 67, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  the Armenian, § 66, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Chazarus, § 66, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  the Isaurian, § 66, 1; 71, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  the Philosopher, § 67, 2; 68, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  the Thracian, § 52, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Henry, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_1'>175, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leonardo da Vinci, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leonidas, § 22, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Leonistæ</foreign>, § 108, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leontius of Byzant., § 47. 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leopardi, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_7'>174, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leopold I., Emperor, § 153, <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Tuscany, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leovigild, § 76, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leporius, § 52, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lessing, § 171, <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>8</ref>, <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lestines, Synod of, § 78, 5; 86, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lestrange, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>186, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leucius, § 32, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Levellers, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_2'>162, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leyser, § 155, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Libanius, § 42, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Libellatici</foreign>, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Libelli pacis</foreign>, § 39, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Liber confirmitat.</foreign>, § 98, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>diurnus</foreign>, § 46, 11; 52, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>paschalis</foreign>, § 56, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pontificalis</foreign>, § 90, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liberal Arts, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liberation Society, § <ref target='Section_202'>202</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liberatus of Carthage, § 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liberius of Rome, § 46, 4; 50, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Libertins, § 146, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Libri Carolini</foreign>, § 92, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Licet ab initio</foreign>, § 139, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Licinius, § 22, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lightfoot, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Light, Friends of, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liguorians, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>165, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_186_Para_1'>186, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Limborch, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Limbus infantium, § 106, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   patrum, § 106, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Limina apostt.</foreign>, § 57, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Linus, § 17, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Linz, Peace of, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lippe, Princes' Diet of, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_2'>154, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_194_Para_5'>194, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lipsius, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_19'>182, 19</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liptinä, Synod of, § 75, 5; 86, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lisco, § <ref target='Section_181_Para_4'>181, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Litany, § 59, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lithuanians, § 93, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Litteræ formatæ</foreign>, § 34, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liturgical dress, etc., § 59, 7; 60, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liturgy, § 36, 1; 59, 6; 89, 1; 104, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liudger, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liutprand, § 82, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livingstone, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_4'>184, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livinus, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Livonia, § 93, 12; 139, 3; <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_168_Para_5'>168, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_206_Para_3'>206, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Locke, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_2'>164, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lodges, Free Masons', § 104, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Löhe, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_1'>175, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_208_Para_2'>208, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lola Montez, § <ref target='Section_195_Para_2'>195, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lollards, § 116, 3; 119, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lombardus, § 102, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Longobards, § 76, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lope de Vega, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loretto, § 115, 9.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='520'/><anchor id='Pg520'/>

<lg>
<l>Löscher, § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louis the Bavarian, § 110, 3, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  German, § 82, 5, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Pious, § 82, 4; 90, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II., Emperor, § 82, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   VII. of France, § 94, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   IX., the Saint, § 93, 15; 94, 6; 96, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louis XI., § 110, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   XII., § 110, 13, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   XIII., § <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   XIV., § <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_156_Para_3'>156, 3</ref>; 157, <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Louis I. of Bavaria, § <ref target='Section_195_Para_2'>195, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II.     "      § <ref target='Section_195_Para_3'>195, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   V. of Hesse, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_1'>154, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   VI. of Palatinate, § 143, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lourdes, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_14'>188, 14</ref>; <ref target='Section_203_Para_5'>203, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lothair I., Emperor, § 82, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., of Lothringia, § 82, 5, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., the Saxon, § 96, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lotze, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Low Churchmen, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>202, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loyola, § 149, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loyson, § 189, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lübeck, § 127, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lübker, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_4'>174, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucar, Cyr., § <ref target='Section_152_Para_2'>152, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucerne, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_1'>199, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucian, Martyr, § 31, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Samosata, § 23, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucidus, § 53, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucifer of Calaris, § 47, 14; 50, 2, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luciferians, § 50, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucilla, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucius II., Pope, § 96, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   III., § 96, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucrezia Borzia, § 110, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ludmilla, § 79, 3; 93, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luis de Leon, § 149, 14, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luke of Prague, § 115, 7; 119, 8; 139, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lullus of Mainz, § 78, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lullus Raimund, § 93, 16; 103, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lüneburg, § 127, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luthardt, § 182, <ref target='Section_182_Para_14'>14</ref>, <ref target='Section_182_Para_21'>21</ref>; <ref target='Section_194_Para_1'>194, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luther, § 122-135.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lutherans, Separatists, Pruss., § 177, <ref target='Section_177_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_177_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luther-Memorial, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_1'>178, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Jubilee, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_10'>175, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lütkemann Controversy, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_1'>159, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lutz, Minister, § <ref target='Section_195_Para_3'>195, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_4'>197, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luxeuil, § 78, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyons, Council of, § 67, 4; 96, 20, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyra, Nich. v., § 113, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mabillon, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macarius the Elder, § 47, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Magnes, § 47, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maccabees, Fest. of, § 57, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macedonius, § 50, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macchiavelli, § 120, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maccovius, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MacConochie, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_3'>202, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macmahon, § 203, <ref target='Section_203_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_203_Para_6'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macrae, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_8'>202, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macrianus, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macrina, § 47, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madagascar, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_3'>184, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madiai, § <ref target='Section_204_Para_3'>204, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maerlant, § 105, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magdeburg, § 127, 4; 137, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magister historiarum</foreign>, § 105, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sententiarum</foreign>, § 102, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Magna Charta</foreign>, § 96, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magnoald, § 78, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magnus the Good, § 93, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Mecklenburg, § 134, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Upsala, § 139, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mai, Cardinal, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maid of Orleans, § 116, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maimbourg, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maimonides, § 103, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mainau Law, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_11'>197, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maintenon, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_3'>157, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='521'/><anchor id='Pg521'/>

<lg>
<l>Mainz Cath. Union, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_4'>186, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_1'>197, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Majorist Controversy, § 141, 6, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maistre, § 187, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malachi, Proph. of, § 149, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malakanians, § <ref target='Section_166_Para_2'>166, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malan, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_5'>199, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malchion, § 33, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maldonatus, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maltese, § 98, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mamertus, § 59, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandæans, § 25, 1; 28, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandeville, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manfred, § 96, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manichæans, § 29; 54, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manning, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>; 202, <ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_202_Para_11'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mansi, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mantua, Council of, § 96, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Congress of, § 110, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manuel Comnenus, § 69, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manzoni, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_7'>174, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maphrian, § 52, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mara, § 13, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marburg Bible, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Church Order, § 127, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Colloquy, § 132, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcellus of Ancyra, § 50, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., § 149, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcia, § 22, 3; 41, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcian, § 52, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcion, § 27, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcionites, § 27, 12; 54, 1; 64, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marco Polo, § 93, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcosians, § 27, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcus Aurelius, § 22, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Eremita, § 47, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Eugenicus, § 67, 6; 68, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maresius, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Margaret of Navarre, § 120, 6; 146, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marheincke, § 182, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maria Theresa, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mariana, § 149, 10, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marinus, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mariolatry, § 57, 2; 104, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marius Mercator, § 47, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Victorinus, § 47, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marloratus, § 143, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marnix, Ph. v., § 139, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maronites, § 52, 8; 72, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marot, § 143, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marozia, § 96, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage, Christian, § 39, 1; 61, 2; 70, 2; 88, 3; 89, 4; 104, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marsden, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_7'>184, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marsilius of Inghem, § 113, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Padua, § 118, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martensen, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_10'>182, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martin I., § 46, 11; 52, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   IV., § 96, 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   V., § 110, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Braga, § 76, 4; 90, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Mainz, § 114, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Paderborn, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>197, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Tours, § 47, 14; 54, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   St., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>165, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martyrs, § 22, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Acts of, § 32, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Veneration of, § 39, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martyrologies, § 57, 1; 90, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marx, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_4'>212, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary of England, § 139, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  "  Guise, § 139, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  "  Jesus, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_5'>156, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  "  Scotland, § 139, 6, 8, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maryland, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_5'>208, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mass, Canon of, § 59, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Sacrifice of, § 36, 6; 58, 3; 88, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massacre, Irish, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of St. Bartholomew, § 139, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Stockholm, § 139, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Thorn, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>165, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massilians, § 53, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massillon, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='522'/><anchor id='Pg522'/>

<lg>
<l>Mastricht, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matamoros, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_4'>205, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maternus, Jul. Firm., § 47, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Pistorius, § 120, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mathesius, § 142, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matilda, Margravine, § 96, 8, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthias, Emperor, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthys, Jan., § 147, 8, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maulbronn, Formula, § 141, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Conference, § 144, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maur, Monks of St., § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   St., § 85.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maurice of Hesse, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_1'>154, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Orange, § 139, 12; <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Saxony, § 136; 137.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mauritius, St., § 22, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Emperor, § 46, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maxentius, § 22, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximianus Herculius, § 22, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximilian I., § 110, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II, § 137, 8; 139, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     I., Duke of Bavaria, § 151, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     III., Elector of Bavaria, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     I., King of Bavaria, § <ref target='Section_195_Para_1'>195, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II., King of Bavaria,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Francis of Cologne, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_13'>165, 13</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Emperor of Mexico, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>209, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximilla, § 40, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximinus Daza, § 22, 6, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Thrax, § 22, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximus, Emperor, § 54, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Confessor, § 47, 12; 52, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayer, Seb., § 130, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May Laws, Prussian, § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "    Austrian, § <ref target='Section_198_Para_6'>198, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maynooth Bill, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_9'>202, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mayhew, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_7'>162, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mechitarists, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>165, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mechthild, § 107, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mecklenburg, § 134, 5; <ref target='Section_194_Para_6'>194, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medici, § 110, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meinhart, § 93, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meinrad, § 85, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mel, Conrad, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melanchthon, § 122, 5; 139, 13; 141, 7, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melchers, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_12'>188, 12</ref>; <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>; 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_12'>12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melchiades, § 46, 3; 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melchionites, § 147, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melchisedecians, § 33, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melchites, § 52, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meletius of Antioch, § 50, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Lycopolis, § 41, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melissander, § 142, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melito, § 30, 8; 36, 8; 40, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memnon of Ephesus, § 52, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menander, § 25, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mendelssohn, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_3'>171, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Bartholdy, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_10'>174, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mendez, § <ref target='Section_152_Para_1'>152, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mendicant Friars, § 98, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menius, § 141, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menken, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_3'>172, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mennas, § 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mennonites, § 147, 2; <ref target='Section_163_Para_1'>163, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menologies, § 57, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Menot, § 115, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mensurius, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercedarians, § 98, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercerus, § 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merlan, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merle d'Aubigné, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_2'>178, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mermillod, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_199_Para_2'>199, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mersen, Treaty of, § 82, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Merswin, § 114, 2, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mesmer, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mesrop, § 64, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messalians, Christian, § 44, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Pagan, § 42, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meth, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_9'>163, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='523'/><anchor id='Pg523'/>

<lg>
<l>Methodists, § 169, <ref target='Section_169_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_169_Para_5'>5</ref>; <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_1'>211, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Methodius, § 73, 3; 79, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Olympus, § 31, 9; 33, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metraphanes, § 67, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Critop., § <ref target='Section_152_Para_2'>152, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metropolitans, § 34, 3; 83, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mettrie, la, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>165, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexico, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>209, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_190_Para_3'>190, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meyer, H. A. W., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_11'>182, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meyffart, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael, Archangel, § 88, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Acominatus, § 68, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Balbus, § 66, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Bradacz, § 119, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Cærularius, § 119, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Cesnea, § 112, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     the Drunkard, § 67, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Palæologus, § 67, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael Angelo, § 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michaelis, Chr. Ben., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>167, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      J. D., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>171, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      J. H., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>167, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michaelmas, § 57, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michaud, § <ref target='Section_190_Para_3'>190, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michelians, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_3'>171, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michelis, § <ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>190, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Micislas, § 93, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milicz, § 119, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Militia Christi</foreign>, § 37.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mill, Walter, § 139, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Millennium, § 33, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milman, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_4'>182, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miltiades of Athens, § 30, 8; 37, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     "  Rome, § 46, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miltiz, § 122, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milton, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_3'>172, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minimi, § 112, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minnesingers, § 105, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minorites, § 98, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minster, § 84, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minucius Felix, § 31, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Fundanus, § 22, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Missa Catechum. et fidelium</foreign>, § 36, 2, 3; 58, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Missa Solitaria</foreign>, § 58, 3.</l>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>  "   Sponsorum</foreign>, § 61, 2; 88, 3; 104, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missa Marcelli, § 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Missale Rom.</foreign>, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missionary Societies, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>172, 5</ref>; 5; <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>184, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_186_Para_6'>186, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missions, Foreign, § 75-78; 93.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"        "     Catholic, § 150; 156, <ref target='Section_156_Para_10'>10</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_12'>12</ref>; <ref target='Section_165_Para_3'>165, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_186_Para_7'>186, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missions, Foreign, Protest., § 142, 8; 143, 7; <ref target='Section_160_Para_7'>160, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_162_Para_7'>162, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_168_Para_11'>168, 11</ref>: <ref target='Section_184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missions, Home, Catholic, § 149, 7; <ref target='Section_156_Para_4'>156, 4</ref>; 186, <ref target='Section_186_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_186_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missions, Home, Protest., § <ref target='Section_183'>183</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missions, Priests of the, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missouri Synod, § 208, <ref target='Section_208_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_208_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mistewoi, § 93, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitre, § 84, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mizetius, § 91, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Modalists, § 33.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moderates, § 202, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mogilas, § <ref target='Section_152_Para_3'>152, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mogtasilah, § 28, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammed, § 65.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II., § 67, 7; 110, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedans, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_9'>184, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Möhler, § 191, <ref target='Section_191_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_191_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molanus, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molay, § 112, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moleschott, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molina, § 149, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molinæus, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molinos, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>157, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Momiers, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_5'>199, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mommers, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_2'>169, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mömpelgard, Relig. Confer., § 138, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Monarcha theologor.</foreign>, § 103, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monarchians, § 33.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Monasterium Clericor.</foreign>, § 45, 1.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='524'/><anchor id='Pg524'/>

<lg>
<l>Monasticism, § 44; 70; 85; 98; 112; 149; <ref target='Section_156'>156</ref>; <ref target='Section_165'>165</ref>; <ref target='Section_186'>186</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mongols, § 93, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monica, § 47, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Monita Secreta</foreign>, § 149, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monod, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_4'>203, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monogram, § 38, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monophysites, § 52, 5, 7; 72, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monothelites, § 52, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montalembert, § 189, 9; <ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>190, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montalte, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montalto, § 149, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montanists, § 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montanus, Arias, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monte, del, § 149, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monte Cassino, § 85.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Corvino, § 93, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montesquieu, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>165, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montfaucon, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_11'>165, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montfort, Sim. de, § 109, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montmorency, § 139, 13, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moody, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_1'>211, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moors, § 81; 95.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moralities, § 105, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morata, § 139, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moravia, § 79, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moravian Brethren, § 119, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moray, The Regent, § 139, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>More, Sir Thomas, § 120, 7; 139, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morel, § 139, 25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moreno, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_2'>209, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morgan, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morinus, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moriscoes, § 95, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morland, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_5'>153, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mormons, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_12'>211, 12-14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morone, § 135, 2; 137, 5; 139, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morison, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_6'>184, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mortara, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_8'>175, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morton, § 139, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morus, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosaics, § 60, 6; 104, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moser, J. F. v., § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    K. F. v., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_10'>171, 10</ref>; <ref target='Section_172_Para_2'>172, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moses of Chorene, § 64, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mosheim, § 5, 3; <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moslems, § 65.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moulin, du, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mouls, § 190, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Movers, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_8'>191, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mozarabians, § 81, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mozarabic Liturgy, § 88, 1; 104, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mozart, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_10'>174, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mtesa, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_4'>184, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q><emph>Mucker</emph>,</q> § <ref target='Section_176_Para_3'>176, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mühlenberg, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_2'>208, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mühler, v., § <ref target='Section_193_Para_4'>193, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_2'>197, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Müller, Ad., § <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Bem., § <ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>211, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    G., § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    H., § <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    J. v., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    J. G., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Jul., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_10'>182, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Münster, City, § 133, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Seb., § 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Münzer, Thos., § 124, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muratori, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>165, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muratorian Canon, § 36, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murillo, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murner, Thos., § 125, 4; 130, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murrone, § 112, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Musæus, § 141, 7; 144, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Musculus, Andr., § 141, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Wolfg., § 141, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Music, § 59, 3; 104, 11; 115, 8; 149, 15; <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_172_Para_1'>172, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_174_Para_10'>174, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Muspilli, § 89, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mutianus, § 120, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mwanga, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_4'>184, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myconius, § 125, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Oswald, § 133, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysos, § 139, 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysteries, § 105, 5; 115, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mystics, Eastern, § 92; 102; 103; 107; 114.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mystics, Grecian, § 47, 7, 11; 68, 3.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='525'/><anchor id='Pg525'/>

<lg>
<l>Mystics, Catholic, § 149, 16; <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>156, 1-4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mystics, Protest., § 146; <ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>160, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_169_Para_3'>169, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naassenes, § 27, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nägelsbach, § 173, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namszanowski, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_2'>197, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nantes, Edict of, § 139, 17; <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Napoleon I., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_5'>165, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>203, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Napoleon III., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>185, 3</ref>; 203, <ref target='Section_203_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_203_Para_4'>4</ref>; <ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>209, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narthex, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nassau, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_6'>193, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_196_Para_4'>196, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Natales episc.</foreign>, § 45, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Martyrum, § 39, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natalis, Alexander, § 5, 2; <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>157, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natalius, § 33, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>National Assembly, French, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>National Convention, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natorp, § <ref target='Section_181_Para_2'>181, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naumburg, Bishopric of, § 135, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Princes' Diet, § 141, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nauplia, Syn., § <ref target='Section_207_Para_1'>207, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nauvoo, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naylor, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_4'>163, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nazareans, § 28, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neander, § 5, 5; <ref target='Section_182_Para_4'>182, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Joach., § <ref target='Section_162_Para_6'>162, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nectarius, § 61, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nemesius, § 47, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nennius, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neophytes, § 34, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neo-Platonists, § 24, 2; 42.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nepomuk, § 116, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nepos of Arsinoë, § 33, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nepotism, § 110.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neri, Philip, § 149, 7; <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nero, § 22, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nerses I., § 64, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   IV., Clajensis, § 72, 2.</l>
<l>   "   of Lampron, § 72, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nerva, § 22, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nestor, § 73, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nestorians, § 52, 3; 64, 2; 72, 1; 150, 4; <ref target='Section_184_Para_9'>184, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nestorius, § 52, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Netherlands, § 139, 12; <ref target='Section_162_Para_4'>162, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_169_Para_2'>169, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_184_Para_5'>184, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_200'>200</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neuendettelsau, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neumann, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neumark, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newman, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>202, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New Year, § 56, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicæa, Council of, § 40, 1; 41, 4; 46, 3; 50, 1; 56, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicephorus Gregoras, § 69, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Callisti, § 5, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicetas Acominatus, § 68, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Nicomedia, § 67, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Pectoratus, § 67, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicholas I., § 67, 1; 73, 3; 82, 7; 83, 3; 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicholas II., § 96, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., IV., § 96, 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    V., § 110, 9, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Basel, § 114, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Cabasilas, § 68, 5; 70, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Clemanges, § 118, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     " Cusa, § 113, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    v. d. Flüe, § 116, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Lyra, § 113, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     " Methone, § 68, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Mysticus, § 67, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Pisa, § 110, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    I., Czar, § 206, <ref target='Section_206_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_206_Para_2'>2</ref>; <ref target='Section_210_Para_2'>210, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicolai, Publisher. § <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>171, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Henry, § 146, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Philip, § 142, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicolaitanism, § 96, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicolaitans, § 18, 3; 27, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicole, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niebuhr, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>193, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niedner, § 5, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niemeyer, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_7'>171, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='526'/><anchor id='Pg526'/>

<lg>
<l>Nightingale, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nihilism, § 102, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nihilists, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_6'>212, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nikon, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>163, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nilus Sinaiticus, § 44, 3; 47, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Younger, § 100.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nimbus, § 60, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ninian, § 77, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niphon, Monk, § 70, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Patriarch, § 70, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nismes, Edict of, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nitschmann, § 168, <ref target='Section_168_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_168_Para_11'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nitzsch, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_10'>182, 10</ref>; 193, <ref target='Section_193_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_193_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noailles, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nobili, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_11'>156, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nobla leiczon, § 108, 14 (vol. ii., p. 471).</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nobreja, § 150, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nobunaja, § 150, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noetus, § 33, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nogaret, § 110, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nolasque, § 98, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nominalists, § 99, 2; 113, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nomo-Canon, § 43, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Nonæ</foreign>, § 86, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Non-Intrusionists, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_7'>202, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nonconformists, § 143, 2, 3; 155, <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_155_Para_2'>2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nonna, § 47, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nonnus of Panopolis, § 48, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norbert, § 98, 2; 96, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Normans, § 93, 1; 95, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North African School, § 31, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>North America, § <ref target='Section_208'>208</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Norwegians, § 93, 4; 139, 2; 201, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nösselt, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noting of Verona, § 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Notker Balbulus, § 88, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Labeo, § 100, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novalis, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_5'>174, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novatian, § 31, 12; 41, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novatus, § 38, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noviciate, § 44, 2; 86, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Noyes, § 208, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nuñez de Arca, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nunia, § 64, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nuns, § 44, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nuntio, § 151, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nuremberg, Relig. Peace of, § 133, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Diet of, § 126, 1, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oak, Synod of the, § 51, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oates, Titus, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Oberammergau</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_10'>174, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oberlin, § <ref target='Section_172'>172</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Oblati</foreign>, § 85, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oblations, § 36; 39, 5; 61, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obotrites, § 93, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Observants, § 112, 2; 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Occam, § 112, 2; 113, 3; 118, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Occultists, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_18'>211, 18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ochino, § 139, 24; 147, 6; 149, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O'Connell, § 199, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Octaves, § 56, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>October Assembly, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_3'>178, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odensee, Diet of, § 139, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odilo of Bavaria, § 78, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odo of Clugny, § 98, 1; 100, 2; 104, 10, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odoacer, § 46, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Œcolampadius, § 130, 3, 6; 131, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Œcumenius, § 68, 4,</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oersted, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oetingen, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_15'>182, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oetinger, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_5'>170, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_171_Para_9'>171, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oehler, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_14'>182, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Œuvres</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_4'>186, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Officium S. Mariæ</foreign>:, § 104, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Οἰκόνομοι, § 45, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oischinger, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oktai-Khan, § 93, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olaf, § 80, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Haraldson, § 93, 4, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Schosskönig, § 93, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Trygvason, § 93, 4, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   St., § 93, 4.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='527'/><anchor id='Pg527'/>

<lg>
<l>Olcott, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_18'>211, 18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldcastle, § 119, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldenbarneveldt, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oldenburg, § <ref target='Section_194_Para_5'>194, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olevian, § 144, 1; <ref target='Section_161_Para_4'>161, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olga, § 73, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olgerd, § 93, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oliva, § 108, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olivet, Monks of Mount, § 112, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olivetan, § 138, 1; 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olshausen, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_3'>176, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ommaiades, § 81; 95, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oncken, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_3'>211, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oneida-sect, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>211, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Onochoetes Deus</foreign>, § 23, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oosterzee, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>200, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ophites, § 27, 6, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Opitz, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Optatus of Mileve, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Opzoomer, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_3'>200, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orange, Synod of, § 53, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oratories, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oratory of Divine Love, § 139, 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Fathers of the, § 155, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Priests of the, § 149, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordeals, § 89, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordericus Vitalis, § 5, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordination, § 45, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ordines majores et minores</foreign>, § 34, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ordo Romanus</foreign>, § 59, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Organs, § 88, 2; 104, 11; 115, 8; <ref target='Section_154_Para_3'>154, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origen, § 31, 5; 33, 6-9; 36, 9; 61, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origenist Controversy, § 51.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Original Sin, Controversy about, § 141, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orosius, § 47, 19.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ortlibarians, § 103, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ortuinus Gratus, § 120, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Osculum pacis</foreign>, § 35.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiander, Andr., § 126, 4; 135, 6; 141, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiander, Luc., § <ref target='Section_159_Para_1'>159, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiandrian Controversy, § 141, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ostiarii</foreign>, § 34, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ostrogoths, § 76, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oswald, § 77, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oswy, § 77, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ota, § 78, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otfried, § 89, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otgar of Mainz, § 87, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otternbein, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_4'>208, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ottheinrich, § 135, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otto I., § 93, 2, 8; 96, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  II., III., § 96, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  IV., § 96, 17.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Bamberg, § 93, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   " Passau, § 114, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Overbeek, Painter, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Dr., § <ref target='Section_175_Para_5'>175, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Overberg, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_2'>172, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owen, Rob., § <ref target='Section_212_Para_3'>212, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oxford, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>202, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Movement, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_1'>211, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pabst, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_3'>191, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pabulatores</foreign>, § 44, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paccanari, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_1'>186, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pachomius, § 44, 1, 3, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pacianus, § 47, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pacifico, Fra, § 104, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pack, O. v., § 132, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paderborn, § 133, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paez, § <ref target='Section_152_Para_1'>152, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pagani</foreign>, § 42, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pagi, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>; 5, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pagninus, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pajon, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palamas, § 69, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palatinate, § 135, 6; 144, 1; 153, <ref target='Section_153_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>3</ref>; <ref target='Section_196_Para_4'>196, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paleario, § 139, 22, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestrina, § 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paley, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palladius, § 47, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pallium, § 46, 1; 59, 7; 97, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palm Sunday, § 56, 4.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='528'/><anchor id='Pg528'/>

<lg>
<l>Pamphilus, § 31, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pan-Anglicanism, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>202, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pandulf, § 96, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pan-Presbyterianism, § <ref target='Section_179_Para_3'>179, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pantänus, § 31, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pantheon, § 46, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Papa</foreign>, § 46, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papacy, § 34, 8; 46, 2; 82; 96; 110; 149; <ref target='Section_156'>156</ref>; <ref target='Section_165'>165</ref>; <ref target='Section_185'>185</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papal Elections, § 46, 8, 11; 82, 4; 96, 6, 15, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papebroch, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_2'>155, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paphnutius, § 45, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papias, § 30, 6; 33, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Parabolani</foreign>, § 45, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paracelsus, § 146, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paraguay, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_10'>156, 10</ref>; <ref target='Section_165_Para_3'>165, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pareus, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_5'>159, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parker, Matt., § 139, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Theodore, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_4'>211, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parnell, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_10'>202, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Parochia</foreign>, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Parochus</foreign>, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parsimonius, § 141, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pasagians, § 108, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pascal, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pascale, § 139, 25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Πάσχασταυρώσιμον and ἀναστάσιμον, § 56, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paschal Controversy, § 37, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paschalis I., § 82, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     II., § 96, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     III., § 96, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paschasius, § 99, 5; 91, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paschkow, § <ref target='Section_206_Para_1'>206, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pasquino, § 149, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passaglia, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_5'>187, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passau, Treaty of, § 137, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Passion Play, § 105, 5; 115, 12; <ref target='Section_174_Para_10'>174, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pastor, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pastor æternus</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Patareni</foreign>, § 108, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pataria, § 97, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patent, Austrian, § <ref target='Section_198_Para_3'>198, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Hungarian, § <ref target='Section_198_Para_6'>198, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pater Orthodoxiæ</foreign>, § 47, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patriarchs, § 46.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patriciate, Roman, § 82, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patrick, St., § 77, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Patrimonium pauperum</foreign>, § 45, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"               Petri, § 46, 10; 82, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patripassians, § 33, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patronage, § 84.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patronus, § 57, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, the Apostle, § 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Burgensis, § 113, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Diaconus, § 90, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Orosius, § 47, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Persian, § 48, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Samosata, § 33, 8; 39, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Silentiarius, § 48, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Thebes, § 39, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Warnefried, § 90, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   I., § 82, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   II., § 110, 11, 15; 119, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   III., § 149, 2; 134, 1; 139, 23.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   IV, § 149, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   V., § 155, <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_155_Para_2'>2</ref>, 5; 149, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   I. of Russia, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>186, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paula, St., § 44, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Francis de, § 112, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Vinc. de, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pauli, Greg., § 148, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paulicians, § 71, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paulinus of Antioch, § 50, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Aquileia, § 90, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      " Milan, § 47, 20; 53, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Missionary, § 77, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Nola, § 48, 6; 60, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paulus, Dr., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_2'>182, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pauperes de Lugduno</foreign>, § 108, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    <foreign rend='italic'>Catholici</foreign>, § 108, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Payens, § 98, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pax dissid.</foreign>, § 139, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pearson, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peasants' War, § 124, 5.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='529'/><anchor id='Pg529'/>

<lg>
<l>Pectorale, § 59, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelagius, § 47, 21; 53, 3, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      I., Pope, § 46, 9; 52, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      II.,  "   § 46, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelayo, § 81, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pellicanus, § 120, 4, note.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pellico-Silvio, § 173, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penance, § 104, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penda, § 77, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penitential Books, § 61, 1; 89, 6; 103, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penn, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_5'>163, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentecost, § 37, 1; 56, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepin, § 78, 5; 82, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepucians, § 40, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peraldus, § 103, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perates, § 27, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peregrinus Proteus, § 23, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Pères de la foi</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_1'>186, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perfectionists, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>211, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perfectus, § 21, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pericopes, § 59, 2; <ref target='Section_167_Para_2'>167, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peristerium, § 60, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perkins, § 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peroz, § 64, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perpetua, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perrone, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_9'>191, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persecution of Christians, § 23; 64.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persia, § 64, 2; 93, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perthes, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peschito, § 36, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pestalozzi, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_12'>171, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petavius, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter the Apostle, § 16, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   d'Ailly, § 118, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Alcantara, § 149, 5, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Alexandria, § 41, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Amiens, § 94, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Aragon, § 96, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Bruys, § 108, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Cantor, § 103, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Castelnau, § 109, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Chelczic, § 119, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Clugny, § 96, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Chrysolanus, § 67, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Chrysologus, § 47, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Comestor, § 105, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Damiani, § 97, 4; 104, 10; 106, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Dresdensis, § 115, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Dubois, § 118, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Fullo, § 52, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Hispanus, § 96, 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Lombard, § 102, 5; 104, 2, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Mongus, § 52, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Murrone, § 98, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Pisa, § 90.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Poitiers, § 102, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Siculus, § 71, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Venerable, § 98, 1; 102, 2; 109.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   I. of Russia, § 166.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   and Paul, Festival of, § 57, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Fest. of Chair of St., § 57, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Church of St., § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peter's Pence, § 82.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petersen, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peterson, § 139, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petilian, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrarch, § 115, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrejus, § 120, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrikan, Synod, § 139, 18; 148, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrobrusians, § 108, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrow, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>163, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrucci, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>157, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peucer, § 141, 10; 144, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peyrerius, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peysellians, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_6'>170, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pfaff, § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pfefferkorn, § 120, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pfeffinger, § 141, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pfeiffer, Aug., § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pfenninger, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pfleiderer, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_19'>182, 19</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pflugk, § 135, 3, 5; 136, 5; 137, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pharensis Syn.</foreign>, § 77, 6.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='530'/><anchor id='Pg530'/>

<lg>
<l>Pharisees, § 8, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philadelphia, § 60, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philadelphian Churches, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_1'>170, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Period, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_4'>168, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Sect, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_8'>163, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philaster, § 47, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philip, § 14; 17, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Arabian, § 22, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    I. of France, § 96, 8, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., Aug., § 94, 3; 96, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Fair, § 110, 1, 2; 112, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II. of Spain, § 139, 12, 21.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Swabia, § 96, 17.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Magnanimous, § 126, 4, 5; 135, 1, 3; 137, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippi, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_13'>182, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippists, § 141, 4 ff.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippones, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>163, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philippopolis, Synod of, § 50, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philipps, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phillpotts, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>202, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philo, § 10, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philopatris, § 42, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philoponus, § 47, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophical Sin, § 149, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophoumena, § 31, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philostorgius, § 4, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philoxenus, § 59, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philumena, § 27, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phocas, § 46, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phœbe, § 18, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Photinus, § 50, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Photius, § 67, 1; 68, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phyletism, § <ref target='Section_207_Para_3'>207, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Φωτιζόμενοι, § 35, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Φθαρτολάτραι, § 52, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piacenza, Council, § 94.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piarists, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Picards, § 116, 5; 119, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pichler, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pick, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_8'>211, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Picts, § 77, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Picus of Mirandola, § 120, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pideritz, § 133, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piedmont, § <ref target='Section_204_Para_3'>204, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pietism, Lutheran, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_167_Para_1'>167, 1</ref></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Reformed, § 162, <ref target='Section_162_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_162_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     in 19th Century, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_2'>176, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilate, Acts of, § 14, 2; 31, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilgrim of Passau, § 93, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Fathers, § 143, 4; <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilgrimages, § 57, 6; 89, 4; 104, 8; 115, 9; 188, <ref target='Section_188_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_188_Para_6'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pin, du, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pionius, § 30, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pirkheimer, § 120, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pirminius, § 78, 1, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pirstinger, § 125, 5; 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pisa, Council of, § 110, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piscator, § 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pistis, Sophia, § 27, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pistoja, Synod of, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pistorius, § 135, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Maternus, § 120, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Pius-II'/>
<l>Pius II., § 110, 10; 118, 6; 119, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  III., § 110, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  IV., § 149, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  V., § 149, 3; 139, 23.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  VI., § 165, <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>9</ref>, <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>10</ref>, <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>15</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  VII., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>203, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  VIII., § <ref target='Section_184_Para_1'>184, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_193_Para_1'>193, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  IX., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2</ref> ff.; <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_188_Para_8'>188, 8</ref>; <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_7'>197, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_11'>202, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Placæus, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Planck, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Planeta</foreign>, § 59, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plastic Arts, § 60, 6; 89, 6; 104, 14; 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, § 7, 4; 47, 5; 68, 3; 99, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Platon, § <ref target='Section_166_Para_1'>166, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Platter, § 130, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Plebani</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Plebs</foreign>, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plenaries, § 115, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pleroma, § 26, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pletho, § 68, 2; 120, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny the Younger, § 22, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plotinus, § 24, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plotizin, § <ref target='Section_210_Para_4'>210, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='531'/><anchor id='Pg531'/>

<lg>
<l>Plutschau, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plymouth Brethren, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_11'>211, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pneumatomachians, § 50, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pobedonoszew, § <ref target='Section_206_Para_1'>206, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poblenz, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_5'>184, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pocquet, § 146, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pococke, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Podiebrad, § 119, 7, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poetry, Christian, § 48, 5, 6; 105, 4; 173, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poggio, § 120, 1; 119, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poiret, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_9'>163, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poissy, Relig. Confer., § 139, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poland, § 93, 7; 139, 18; <ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>165, 4</ref>; 206, <ref target='Section_206_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_206_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pole, § 139, 5, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polemon, § 47, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polenz of Samland, § 125, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poliander, § 142, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polo, Marco, § 93, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polozk, Synod of, § <ref target='Section_206_Para_2'>206, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polycarp, § 22, 3; 30, 6; 37, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polychronius, § 47, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polycrates, § 37, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polyglott, Antwerp, § 149, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Complutensian, § 120, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      London, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Paris, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomare, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_7'>184, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pombal, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pommerania, § 93, 10; 134, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomponazzo, § 120, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ponce de la Fuente, § 139, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pœnitentiaria Rom.</foreign>, § 110, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontianus, § 38, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ponticus, § 22, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontius, § 98, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Popiel, § <ref target='Section_206_Para_1'>206, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Popular Philosophy, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>171, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pordage, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_9'>163, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porphyry, § 23, 3; 24, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Portig, § <ref target='Section_180_Para_3'>180, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Portiuncula, § 98, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Port Royal, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Portugal, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_205_Para_5'>205, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Positivism, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_210_Para_1'>210, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Possessor of Carthage, § 53, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Possevin, § 139, 1; 151, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Possidius, § 47, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Post-Apostolic Age, § 20, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Postilla</foreign>, § 103, 9; 116, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potamiæna, § 22, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pothinus, § 22, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Præceptor Germaniæ</foreign>, § 122, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Præpositi</foreign>, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prætorius, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Praxeas, § 33, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer, § 37; 39, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preaching, § 36, 2; 59, 3; 89, 1; 104, 1; 115, 2; 142, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preaching Orders, § 98, 5; 112, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pre-Adamites, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_4'>161, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prebends, § 84, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Precaria, § 86, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Precists, § 96, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Predestination, § 53; 91, 4; 125, 3; 141, 12; 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>3</ref>; <ref target='Section_168_Para_1'>168, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_208_Para_3'>208, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prepon, § 27, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Presburg, Peace of, § <ref target='Section_192'>192</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Presbyter, § 17, 2, 5; 34, 3; 45.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Presbyterians, § 143, 3; <ref target='Section_162_Para_1'>162, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_4'>202, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prierias, § 122, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestley, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_4'>211, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Primacy, Papal, § 34, 8; 46, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Primasius, § 48, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Primian, § 63, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prisca, § 40, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priscillianists, § 54, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Probabilism, § 149, 10; 113, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Procession of Holy Spirit, § 50, 6; 67, 1; 91, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Processions, § 59, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prochorus, § 31, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Procidians, § 27, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proclus, Montanist, § 31, 7; 40, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Neoplaton., § 24, 2; 42, 5.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='532'/><anchor id='Pg532'/>

<lg>
<l>Procopius of Gaza, § 48, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   the Great, § 119, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Procopowicz, § <ref target='Section_166'>166</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Professio fid. Trid.</foreign>, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proles, § 112, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proli, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_16'>211, 16</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Propaganda, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_9'>156, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_204_Para_2'>204, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophecy, § 143, 3, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Propositt. Cleri Gallicani</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_3'>156, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_203_Para_1'>203, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proselytes of Gate and Righteousness, § 10, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Πρόσκλαυσις, § 39, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Προσφοραί, § 36.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prosper Aquit., § 47, 20; 48, 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>53, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proterius, § 52, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protestants, § 132, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Protestantenverein</foreign>,</q> § <ref target='Section_180'>180</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Proudhon, § <ref target='Section_212_Para_1'>212, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Provida sollersque</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_1'>196, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prudentius, Poet, § 48, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Troyes, § 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psellus, § 68, 5; 71, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pseudepigraphs, § 32.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pseudo-Basilideans, § 27, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Clement, § 28, 3; 43, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Cyril, § 96, 23.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Dionysius, § 47, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Ignatius, § 43, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Isidore, § 87, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Tertullian, § 31, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Psychians, § 26, 2; 40, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Publicani</foreign>, § 108, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pufendorf, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_5'>167, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pulcheria, § 52, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pullus, Rob., § 102, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punctation of Ems, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purcell, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_5'>186, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purgatory, § 61, 4; 67, 6; 104, 4; 106, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purists, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puritans; § 143, 3, 4; <ref target='Section_155'>155</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puseyites, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>202, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puttkamer, v., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_8'>174, 8</ref>; <ref target='Section_193_Para_6'>193, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_10'>197, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quadragesima, § 37, 1; 56, 4, 5, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quadratus, § 30, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quadrivium</foreign>, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quakers, § 163, <ref target='Section_163_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_163_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_163_Para_6'>6</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_3'>211, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quanta cura</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quartodecimans, § 37, 2; 56, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quenstedt, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_5'>159, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quercum</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Synod ad</foreign>, § 51, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quesnel, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quicunque</foreign>, § 50, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quietists, § <ref target='Section_157'>157</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quinisextum</foreign>, § 63, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quinquagesima</foreign>, § 37, 1; 56, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quintin, § 146, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quod numquam</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_197_Para_7'>197, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rabanus, § 90, 4; 91, 3, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rabaut, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_5'>165, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rabinowitz, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_9'>211, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rabulas, § 52, 3; 48, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Racovian Catechism, § 148, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Radama I., II., § <ref target='Section_184_Para_3'>184, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Radbertus, § 90, 5; 91, 3, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Radbod, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Radewins, Flor., § 112, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Radstock, § <ref target='Section_206_Para_1'>206, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raimund Lullus, § 93, 16; 103, 7</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Martini, § 103, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Pennaforte, § 93, 16; 99, 5; 113, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raimund du Puy, § 93, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  of Sabunde, § 113, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  " Toulouse, § 109, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rakoczy, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rambach, § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramus, § 143, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ranavalona, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_3'>184, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rancé, de, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raphael, § 115, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>" Union, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_4'>186, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rapp, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_6'>211, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='533'/><anchor id='Pg533'/>

<lg>
<l>Raskolniks, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>163, 10</ref>; <ref target='Section_210_Para_3'>210, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rasoherina, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_3'>184, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raspe, § 105, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Räss, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_196_Para_7'>196, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rastislaw, § 79, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ratherius, § 100, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rationalism, § <ref target='Section_171'>171</ref>; <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>; 182, <ref target='Section_182_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_182_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ratramnus, § 67, 1; 90, 5; 91, 3, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Rauhes Haus</foreign>,</q> § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rauscher, Card., § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_198_Para_2'>198, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ravaillac, § 139, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raynaldi, Oderic, § 5, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Realism and Nominalism, § 99, 2; 113, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Recafrid, § 81, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reccared, § 76, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rechiar, § 76, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Reclusi</foreign>, § 85, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Recognit. Clem.</foreign>, § 27, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Reconciliatio</foreign>, § 39, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Recursus ab abusu</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_4'>185, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_192_Para_4'>192, 4</ref>; 194, 9; <ref target='Section_197_Para_9'>197, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redemptions, § 88, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redemptorists, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_2'>165, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_186_Para_1'>186, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reformation in head and members, § 118, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Refugees, French Huguenot, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regensburg Colloquy, § 130, 3, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Convention, § 126, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Declaration, § 135, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Diet, § 133, 2; 135, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Reformation, § 135, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Synod, § 91, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regino of Prüm, § 90, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reginus, § 104, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regionary Bishops, § 84.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Regula fidei</foreign>, § 35, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reichenau, § 78, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reimarus, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>171, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reinerius Sachoni, § 108, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reinhard, Mart., § 139, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reinhard, Fr. Volk., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reinkens, § <ref target='Section_190_Para_1'>190, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reiser, Fred., § 119, 9; 118, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reland, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Relics, Worship of, § 39, 5; 57, 5; 88, 4; 104, 8; 115, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Religiosi</foreign>, § 44.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remigius of Auxerre, § 90, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Lyons, § 91, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Rheims, § 76, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remismund, § 76, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remoboth, § 44, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remonstrants, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renaissance, § 115, 13; 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renan, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_8'>182, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renata of Ferrara, § 138, 2; 139, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renaudot, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_11'>165, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reni, Guido, § 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reparatus of Carthage, § 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repeal Association, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_9'>202, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Reservatio mentalis</foreign>, § 149, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reservations, § 110, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Reservatum ecclest.</foreign>, § 137, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Restitution Edict, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reuchlin, § 120, 3, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reuss, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_18'>182, 18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revenues of the Church, § 45, 6; 86, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Reversurus</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_207_Para_4'>207, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revivals, § <ref target='Section_208_Para_1'>208, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revolution, French, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>165, 14</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      English, § <ref target='Section_155'>155</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rex Christianiss.</foreign>, § 110, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhaw, § 142, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhegius Urbanus, § 120, 3; 127, 3; 125, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rheinwald, § 83, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhenius, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_5'>184, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhense, Elector. Union of, § 110, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhetorians, § 62, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhine League, § <ref target='Section_192'>192</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhodoald, § 67, 1; 82, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhodon, § 27, 12.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='534'/><anchor id='Pg534'/>

<lg>
<l>Rhyming Bible, § 105, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"  Legends, § 105, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riccabona, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_2'>175, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ricci, Laur., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_9'>165, 9</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Matt., § 150, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Scipio, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richard Cœur de Leon, § 94, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Cornwallis, § 94, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  St. Victor, § 102, 4; 104, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richelieu, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_4'>153, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richter, C. F., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Emil, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_22'>182, 22</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Greg., § <ref target='Section_160_Para_2'>160, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Jean Paul, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Louis, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ridley, § 139, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rieger, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>167, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rienzi, § 110, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rietschel, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riga, § 93, 12; 139, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rigdon, Sidney, § 211, <ref target='Section_211_Para_12'>12</ref>, <ref target='Section_211_Para_13'>13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Riley, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_1'>209, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rimbert, § 80, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rimini, Syn., § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rinck, Melch., § 147, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ring and Staff, § 96, 6, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ringold, § 93, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rinkart, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rist, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Risus Paschales</foreign>, § 105, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritschl, § 182, <ref target='Section_182_Para_7'>7</ref>, <ref target='Section_182_Para_20'>20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritter, Erasm., § 130, 4, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    J. J., § 5, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Carl, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_4'>174, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritualists, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_2'>199, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rizzio, § 139, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robber Synod, § 52, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robert of Arbrissel, § 98, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Citeaux, § 98, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Grosseteste, § 103, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Guiscard, § 95, 1; 98, 6, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Pullus, § 102, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of the Sorbonne, § 103, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robert of France, § 104, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robespierre, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_15'>165, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robinson, § 143, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rodigast, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rodriguez, § 149, 8; 150, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roëll, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_5'>161, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roger of Sicily, § 95, 1; 96, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Röhr, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_2'>182, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rokycana, § 119, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rollo, § 93, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanz, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman Architecture, § 104, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romanus, Pope, § 96, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romuald, § 98, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ronge, § <ref target='Section_187_Para_6'>187, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roos, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosary, § 104, 8; 115, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscelinus, § 101, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rose, The Consecrat. Golden, § 96, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosenkranz, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_6'>182, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosicrucians, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rossi de, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>; 38, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Röstar, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_5'>211, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roswitha, § 100, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rota Romana</foreign>, § 110, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rothad of Soissons, § 83, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rothe, A., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>167, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_168_Para_2'>168, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Rich., § 5, 4; <ref target='Section_180_Para_1'>180, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_10'>182, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rothmann, § 147, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Röublin, § 130, 5; 147, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roundheads, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rousseau, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_14'>165, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rubianus Crotus, § 120, 2, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rückert, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_6'>174, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rudelbach, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_13'>182, 13</ref>; <ref target='Section_194_Para_1'>194, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rudolph of Hapsburg, § 96, 21, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rudolph II., § 129, 19; 137, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Swabia, § 96, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ruet, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_4'>205, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rufinus, § 5, 1; 47, 17; 48, 2; 51, 2.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='535'/><anchor id='Pg535'/>

<lg>
<l>Ruge, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_1'>174, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rügen, § 93, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rugians, § 76, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ruinart, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rulman Merswin, § 114, 2, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rupert, § 78, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     of Deutz, § 102, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rupp, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_178_Para_1'>178, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russel, Lord, § 202, <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_202_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russia, § 73, 5-6; 151, 3; <ref target='Section_163_Para_8'>163, 8</ref>; <ref target='Section_166'>166</ref>; <ref target='Section_206'>206</ref>; 219, 3, 4; <ref target='Section_212_Para_6'>212, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rust, § <ref target='Section_195_Para_5'>195, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ruysbroek, John of, § 114, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      William of, § 93, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Sabatati</foreign>, § 108, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabbath, § 56, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabbatarians, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_3'>163, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_5'>211, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabeans, § 22, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabellius, § 33, 5, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabinianus, § 60, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Sacco di Roma</foreign>, § 132, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sachs, Hans, § 142, 3, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sack, K. H., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_9'>182, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacramentalia, § 58; 104, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacraments, § 58; 70, 2; 104, 2-5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sacramentarium</foreign>, § 59, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sacrificati</foreign>, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sacrum rescript.</foreign>, § 53, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacy, de, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sadducees, § 8, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sadolet, § 138, 3; 139, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sagittarius, § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sailer, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>165, 12</ref>; <ref target='Section_187_Para_1'>187, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saints, Worship of, § 57, 1; 88, 4; 104, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saladin, § 94, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sales, Francis de, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_1'>157, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Nuns of, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salisbury, John of, § 102, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salmeron, § 149, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salt Lake, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salvation Army, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_2'>211, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salvianus, § 47, 21.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salzburg, § 78, 2; 79.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Emigrants of, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_4'>164, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samaritans, § 10; 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sampseans, § 28, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanbenito, § 117, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanchez, § 149, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanction, Pragmatic, § 96, 21; 110, 9, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sanctissimum</foreign>, § 104, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sandwich Islands, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_7'>182, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sankey, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_1'>211, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sapor I., § 29, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sapores, § 64, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarabaites, § 44, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saracens, § 81; 95.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardica, Council of, § 46, 3; 50, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardinia, § 204, <ref target='Section_204_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_204_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarmatio, § 62, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarpi, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_2'>156, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sartorius, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_13'>182, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturnalia, § 56, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturninus, § 27, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saunier, § 138, 1; 139, 25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saurin, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savonarola, § 119, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savonières, Syn. of, § 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sbynko, § 119, 3, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Scala santa</foreign>, § 115, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schaffhausen, § 130, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schelling, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_10'>171, 10</ref>; <ref target='Section_174_Para_1'>174, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schenkel, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_17'>182, 17</ref>; 196, <ref target='Section_196_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_196_Para_4'>4</ref>; <ref target='Section_180_Para_1'>180, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schiller, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schirmer, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schism, Papal, § 110, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     between East and West, § 67.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schisms in the Ancient Church, § 41; 50, 8; 52, 5; 63.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schlegel, Fr., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_5'>174, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      J. Ad., § <ref target='Section_172_Para_1'>172, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schleiermacher, § 5, 4; <ref target='Section_182_Para_1'>182, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='536'/><anchor id='Pg536'/>

<lg>
<l>Schleswig-Holstein, § 127, 3; <ref target='Section_156_Para_2'>156, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_201_Para_1'>201, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_193_Para_7'>193, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schlichting, § 148, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmalcald Articles, § 134, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     League, § 133, 1, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     War, § 136.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmerling, § 198, <ref target='Section_198_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_198_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmid, Leop., § <ref target='Section_187_Para_3'>187, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_2'>191, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_196_Para_4'>196, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmidt, Erasm., § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Lor., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_3'>171, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Seb., § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmolck, § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schnepf, § 122, 2; 131, 1; 133, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schnorr, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schöberlein, § <ref target='Section_181_Para_3'>181, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schola palatina</foreign>, § 90, 1.</l>
<l>   "   <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Saxonica</foreign>, § 82.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scholastica, St., § 85, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scholasticism, Greek, § 47, 6; 68, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Latin, § 99 ff.; 113.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scholasticus, John, § 43, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scholten, § <ref target='Section_200_Para_2'>200, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schools.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schopenhauer, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schortinghuis, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_3'>169, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schroeckh, § 5, 3; <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schubert, § 174, <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_174_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schultens, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schultz, Herm., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_20'>182, 20</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schulz, Dav., § <ref target='Section_183_Para_3'>183, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schwartz, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schwarzenberg, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schweizer, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_9'>182, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schwenkfeld, § 146, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotists, § 113, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotland, § 77, 2; 139, 8; 202, <ref target='Section_202_Para_7'>7</ref>, <ref target='Section_202_Para_8'>8</ref>, <ref target='Section_202_Para_11'>11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scots, 77, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scottish Cloister, § 98, 1; 112.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotus, John Duns, § 113.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Erigena, § 90, 7; 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scriver, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_1'>160, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythianus, § 29, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Seculum obscurum</foreign>, § 100.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Secundus, § 50, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sedes Apostolicæ</foreign>, § 34.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sedulius, § 48, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Segarelli, § 108, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Segneri, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_2'>157, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seiler, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selden, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selnecker, § 141, 12; 142, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sembat, § 71, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semi-arians, § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semi-jejunia, § 37, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semi-pelagians, § 53, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semler, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>171, 6</ref>; 5, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sendomir Compact, § 139, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seneca's Correspondence, § 32, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sententiarists, § 102, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sepp, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_8'>191, 8</ref>; <ref target='Section_174_Para_4'>174, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Septimius Severus, § 22, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Septuagint, § 10, 2; 36, 8; 48, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sequences, § 88, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serapeion, § 42, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seraphic Order, § 98, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serenius Granian., § 22, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serenus of Marsilia, § 57, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sergius of Constantinople, § 52, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Ravenna, § 83, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    I. of Rome, § 46, 11; 63, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., § 82, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., § 96, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., § 96, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serrarius, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servatus Lupus, § 90, 5; 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servetus, § 148, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servites, § 98, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Servus servorum Dei</foreign>, § 46, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sethians, § 27, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seventh-Day Adventists, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_1'>211, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "   Baptists, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_3'>163, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severa, § 23, 4; 26.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severians, § 52, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severina, § 28, 4.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='537'/><anchor id='Pg537'/>

<lg>
<l>Severinus, Missionary, § 76, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Pope, § 46, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severus, Emperor, § 22, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Wolfg., § 137, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shaftesbury, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shakers, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_7'>170, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sherlock, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shiites, § 65, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ship of the Church, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sibylline Books, § 32, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicily, § 81; 95.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sickingen, § 120, 4; 122, 4; 123, 7; 124, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siena, Syn., § 110, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sieveking, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sigfrid, § 93, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sigillaria, § 56, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sigismund of Burgundy, § 76, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Emperor, § 110, 7, 8; 119, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sigismund I. of Poland, § 139, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Aug.     "     § 139, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     III.     "     § 139, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sigurd, § 93, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silesia, § 127, 3; <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>165, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silesius, Angelus, § <ref target='Section_157_Para_4'>157, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_160_Para_4'>160, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silverius, § 46, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon of Jerusalem, § 22, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Stylites, § 44, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   called Titus, § 71, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Czar, § 73, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Metaphrastes, § 68, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Thessalonica, § 68, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Tournay, § 103, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   VI., VII.; Counts of Lippe, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_2'>154, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeoni, § <ref target='Section_205_Para_4'>205, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simon Magus, § 25, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Rich., § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   St., § <ref target='Section_212_Para_2'>212, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simonians, § 27, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simons, Menno, § 147, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simony, § 96, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simplicius, § 42, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siricius, § 45, 2; 46, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sirmium, Syn., § 50, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sirmond, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sisters of Mercy, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>; <ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>186, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sixtus II., § 22, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., § 46, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., § 110, 11; 112, 3; 115, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sixtus V., § 149, 3, 4, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Siena, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skeleton Army, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_2'>211, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Jos., § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Pearsall, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_1'>211, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Robertson, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_8'>202, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socialism, § <ref target='Section_212'>212</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socinians, § 148, 4; <ref target='Section_202_Para_5'>202, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soissons, Syn., § 78, 4; 102, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sollicitudo omnium</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_1'>185, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Somerset, § 139, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophia, Church of, § 60, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophronius, § 52, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sorbonne, § 103, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soter, § 36, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Southcote, Joanna, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_5'>211, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain, § 76, 2, 3; 95, 2; 139, 21; <ref target='Section_205'>205</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spalatin, § 122, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spalding, Bishop, § <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>189, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spangenberg, John, § 142, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Bishop, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_7'>168, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spanheim, § 5, 2; 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Speaker's Bible, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_1'>202, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spencer, John, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Herbert, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spener, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_167_Para_5'>167, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spiera, Fr., § 139, 2, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spinoza, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_1'>164, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spires, Diet, § 126, 6; 132, 3; 135, 9; 147, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit, Sect of the New, § 108, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Spiritales</foreign>, § 40, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirituals, § <ref target='Section_164_Para_1'>164, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Spirituels</foreign>, § 146, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sponsors, § 35, 5; 58, 1.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='538'/><anchor id='Pg538'/>

<lg>
<l>Sufis, § 61, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stackhouse, § <ref target='Section_168_Para_6'>168, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stahl, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_15'>182, 15</ref>; <ref target='Section_193_Para_6'>193, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stancarns, § 141, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanislaus, St., § 93, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Znaim, § 119, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanley, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_4'>184, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stapfer, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stapulensis, § 120, 7, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Starck, § <ref target='Section_175_Para_7'>175, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Starowerzi, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_10'>163, 10</ref>; <ref target='Section_210_Para_3'>210, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Staudenmaier, § <ref target='Section_191_Para_6'>191, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stäudlin, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Staupitz, § 112, 6; 122, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stedingers, § 109, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steffens, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_3'>174, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_177_Para_2'>177, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stein, Baron v., § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steinbart, § 171, <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steinmetz, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>167, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephan I., § 35, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., § 66, 2; 78, 7; 82, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., § 60, 2; 82, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IV., § 82, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    V., VI., § 82, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    IX., § 96, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    St., § 93, 8; 96, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Palecz, § 119, 4, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Sunik, § 72, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Tigerno, § 98, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Mart., § <ref target='Section_194_Para_1'>194, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephanas, § 18, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen Langton, § 96, 18.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stier, § <ref target='Section_181_Para_1'>181, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_183_Para_4'>183, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stigmatization, § 105, 4; <ref target='Section_188_Para_3'>188, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stirner, Max., § <ref target='Section_212_Para_1'>212, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stolberg, § 5, 6; <ref target='Section_165_Para_6'>165, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Storch, Nich., § 124, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Storr, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strassburg, § 125, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Minster, § 104, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strauss, Dav. Fr., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_1'>174, 1</ref>; 182, <ref target='Section_182_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_182_Para_8'>8</ref>; <ref target='Section_199_Para_4'>199, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Streoneshalch, Syn., § 77, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strossmayer, § 189, <ref target='Section_189_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_189_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stuart, Mary, § 139, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Studites, § 44, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sturm of Fulda, § 78, 4, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stylites, § 44, 6; 78, 3; 85, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suarez, § 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Subintroductæ</foreign>, § 39, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Subordinationists, § 33, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suevi, § 76, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffragan Bishops, § 84.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sully, § 139, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sulpicius Severus, § 47, 17.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Summa</foreign> of Holy Scripture, § 125, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Summaries, Württemb., § <ref target='Section_160_Para_6'>160, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Summis desiderantes</foreign>, § 117, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Summists, § 102, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Summus Episcopus</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_3'>167, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sun, Children of, § 71, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunday, Fest. of, § 17, 7; 37; 56, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunnites, § 65, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Supplicationes</foreign>, § 59, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supralapsarians, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_1'>161, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supernaturalists, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>; 182, <ref target='Section_182_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_182_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suso, H., § 114, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sutri, Syn., § 96, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swabian Articles, § 132, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Halle, Sect in, § 108, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweden, § 80; 93, 3; 139, 1; <ref target='Section_201_Para_2'>201, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swedenborgians, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_5'>170, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_4'>211, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweyn, § 93, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Switzerland, § 78, 1; 130; 138; <ref target='Section_162_Para_6'>162, 6</ref>; 189, 7; <ref target='Section_190_Para_3'>190, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_199'>199</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sydow, § <ref target='Section_180_Para_4'>180, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syllabus, § <ref target='Section_185_Para_2'>185, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sylvester I., § 42, 1; 46, 3; 59, 5; 82, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sylvester II., § 94; 96, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     III., § 96, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Bern., § 102, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Symbolum Apost.</foreign>, § 35, 2; 59, 2.</l>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>    "    Athan.</foreign>, § 59, 2.</l>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>    "    Nic. Constant.</foreign>, § 59, 2.</l>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>    "    Nicænum</foreign>, § 50, 1.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='539'/><anchor id='Pg539'/>

<lg>
<l>Symmachus, Pope, § 46, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Prefect, § 42, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sympherosa, § 32, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synagogues, § 8, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syncretist Controv., § <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synergists, § 53, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synesius, § 47, 7; 59, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Syngramma Suevic.</foreign>, § 131, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synod, Holy Russian, § <ref target='Section_166'>166</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    The Holy Athens, § <ref target='Section_207_Para_1'>207, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synods, § 34, 5; 43, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Synodus palmaris</foreign>, § 46, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syrians, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_9'>184, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_207_Para_2'>207, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syzigies, § 27, 3; 28, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tabernaculum, § 104, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taborites, § 119, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taepings, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_15'>211, 15</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tafel, Imm., § <ref target='Section_211_Para_4'>211, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tahiti, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_6'>184, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talmud, § 25.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamerlane, § 72, 1; 93, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamuls, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_5'>184, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanchelm, § 108, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tartars, § 73, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tasso, § 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tatian, § 27, 10; 30, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tauler, § 114, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teellinck, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_4'>161, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teetotallers, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_9'>202, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Telesphorus, § 22, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teller, § 171, <ref target='Section_171_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_171_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Templars, § 98, 8; 112, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Terminants, § 98, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Terminism, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_2'>167, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Territorial System, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_5'>167, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tersteegen, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tertiaries, § 93, 3, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tertullian, § 31, 10; 33, 4, 9; 34, 8; 40, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tertullianists, § 40, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tessareskaidecatites</foreign>, § 37, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Test Act, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>155, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_5'>202, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Testam. of XII. Patri., § 32, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tetzel, § 122, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teutonic Knights, § 98, 8; 93, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theatines, § 149, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thecla, § 32, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theiner, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_1'>186, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_187_Para_4'>187, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_191_Para_7'>191, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodelinde, § 76, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodemir, § 92, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodo I., II., § 78, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodora, § 46, 9; 52, 6; 71, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodore of Abyssinia, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_9'>182, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodoret, § 47, 9; 52, 3, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodoric, § 46, 8; 76, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Freiburg, § 103, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Niem, § 118, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodorus, Pope, § 52, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Ascidas, § 52, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Balsamon, § 43, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Lector, § 5, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Mopsuestia, § 47, 9; 48, 1; 52, 3; 53, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodorus Studita, § 66, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Tarsus, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius the Great, § 42, 4; 47, 15; 50, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius II., § 42, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodotians, § 33, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodulf of Orleans, § 89, 2; 90, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theognis of Nicæa, § 50, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theonas, § 50, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theopaschites, § 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophanies, § 96, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophilus, Emperor, § 66, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Alexandria, § 42, 4; 51, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophilus of Antioch, § 30, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Din, § 64, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      "  Moscow, § <ref target='Section_166_Para_1'>166, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophylact, § 68, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Θεοτόκος, § 52, 2, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Therapeutæ, § 10, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theresa, St., § 149, 6, 15, 16.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Thesaurus supererogat.</foreign>, § 106, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thiers, § <ref target='Section_203_Para_5'>203, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thiersch, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='540'/><anchor id='Pg540'/>

<lg>
<l>Thietberga, § 82, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thietgaut of Treves, § 82, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thilo, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tholuck, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_4'>182, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas Aquinas, § 103, 6; 96, 23; 104, 4, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas Becket, § 96, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Bradwardine, § 113, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Celano, § 104, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   a Kempis, § 112, 9; 114, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomas Christians, § 52, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomasius, Chr., § 117, 4; <ref target='Section_159_Para_3'>159, 3</ref>; 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_5'>5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomasius, Gottfr., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_13'>182, 13</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomassinus, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_1'>158, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thomists, § 113, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thontracians, § 71, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thorn, Declarat., § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Massacre, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_4'>165, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Relig. Confer., § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_154_Para_4'>154, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thorwaldsen, § 173, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrasimund, § 76, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Thuribulum</foreign>, § 60, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Thurificati</foreign>, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiara, Papal, § 96, 23.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiberius, § 22, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tieck, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_5'>174, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tieftrunk, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_7'>171, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tillemont, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_2'>158, 2</ref>; 5, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tillotson, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_3'>161, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timotheus Älurus, § 52, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tindal, Matt., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    William, § 139, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiridates III., § 64, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tischendorf, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_11'>182, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titian, § 115, 13; 149, 11.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tituli</foreign>, § 84, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titus of Bostra, § 54, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toland, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toledo, Syn., § 76, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toleration Acts, English, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>155, 3</ref>; <ref target='Section_202_Para_5'>202, 5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Edict, Austr., § <ref target='Section_165_Para_10'>165, 10</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Patent, Pruss., § <ref target='Section_193_Para_3'>193, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tolomeo of Lucca, § 5, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tolstoi, § <ref target='Section_206_Para_1'>206, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonsure, § 45, 1; 77, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tooth, Arth., § <ref target='Section_202_Para_3'>202, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torgau, Articles of, § 132, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Book of, § 141, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    League of, § 126, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torquemada, John, § 110, 15; 112, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Thomas, § 117, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toulouse, Syn., § 105, 5; 108, 2; 109, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tours, Syn., § 101, 2; 110, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tractarianism, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_2'>202, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tradition, § 33, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Traditors, § 22, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Traducianism, § 53, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trajan, § 22, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tranquebar, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Translations, § 57, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transept, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transubstantiation, § 58, 2; 104, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transylvania, § 139, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trappists, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tremellius, § 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trent, Council of, § 149, 2; 136, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Treuga Dei</foreign>, § 105, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tribur, Princes' Diet, § 96, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Syn., § 83, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinitarian Controversy, § 32; 50.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Order, § 98, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinity, Festival of the, § 104, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Order of the Holy, § 149, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trishagion, § 52, 5, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trithemius, § 113, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Trivium</foreign>, § 90, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Troparies, § 59, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Troubadours, § 105, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Trullanum, I. Conc.</foreign>, § 52, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>       "   II.  "</foreign>  § 63, 2; 45, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tübingen, § 120, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turkey, § <ref target='Section_207'>207</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='541'/><anchor id='Pg541'/>

<lg>
<l>Turrecremata, John, § 110, 15; 112, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turrecremata, Thos., § 117, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turretin, J. A., § 164, <ref target='Section_164_Para_1'>1</ref>, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turribius, § 54, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tutilo, § 88, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twesten, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_10'>182, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tychonius, § 48, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Typus, § 52, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrol, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_4'>193, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyre, Syn., § 50, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ubertino de Casale, § 108, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ubiquitas Corp. Chr.</foreign>, § 141, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Udo, § 62, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ugolino, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_12'>165, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uhlhorn, § <ref target='Section_193_Para_8'>193, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uhlich, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulenberg, § 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulfilas, § 76, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ullmann, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_10'>182, 10</ref>; <ref target='Section_196_Para_3'>196, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulrich of Augsb., § 84, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  Württemb., § 133, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulrici, § <ref target='Section_174_Para_2'>174, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_17'>211, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ultramontanism, § <ref target='Section_188'>188</ref>; <ref target='Section_197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Umbreit, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_11'>182, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</foreign>, § 110, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Unctio extrema</foreign>, § 61, 3; 70, 2; 104, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uniformity, Act of, § 139, 6; <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>155, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unigenitus, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Union Attempts in the Eastern Church, § 67, 4, 5; <ref target='Section_152_Para_2'>152, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_175_Para_4'>175, 4-6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Union, Catholic Protestant, § 137, 8; <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Union, Lutheran Reformed, § 155, 4; <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>; 169, <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_169_Para_2'>2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Union, Prussian, § <ref target='Section_177_Para_1'>177, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unitarians, § 148; <ref target='Section_163_Para_1'>163, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_211_Para_4'>211, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>United Brethren, § 119, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Greeks, § 72, 4; 151, 3; <ref target='Section_206_Para_2'>206, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Universities, § 99, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Bill, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_5'>199, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urban II., § 96, 10; 94.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   III., § 96, 16.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   IV., § 96, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   V., § 110, 5; 117, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   VI., § 110, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   VII., § 149, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   VIII., § 156, <ref target='Section_156_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_156_Para_9'>9</ref>; <ref target='Section_157_Para_5'>157, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Urbanus Rhegius, § 127, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ursacius, § 50, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ursinus of Rome, § 46, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Zach., § 144, 1; <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ursula, St., § 104, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ursuline Nuns, § 149, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ussher, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utah, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_10'>211, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utraquists, § 119, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utrecht, Church of, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_7'>165, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Union of, § 139, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vadian, § 130, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valdez, § 108, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valence, Syn., § 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valens, Emperor, § 50, 4; 42, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valentinian I., § 42, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      II., § 42, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      III., § 46, 3; 46, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valentinus, § 27, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valerian, § 22, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valla, § 120, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vallombrosians, § 98, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valsainte, § <ref target='Section_186_Para_2'>186, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valteline Massacre, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_3'>153, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vandals, § 76, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vanne, Congreg. of, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_7'>156, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Varanes I., § 29, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III., § 64, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Variata</foreign>, § 141, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vasa, Gustavus, § 139, 1; 142, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vasquez, § 149, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vatican, § 110, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Council, § <ref target='Section_189'>189</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vatke, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_18'>182, 18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='542'/><anchor id='Pg542'/>

<lg>
<l>Vaud, Canton, § <ref target='Section_199_Para_5'>199, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vega, Lope de, § <ref target='Section_158_Para_3'>158, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Velasquez, § 98, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venantius Fortunatus, § 48, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venema, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venezuela, § <ref target='Section_209_Para_2'>209, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vercelli, Syn., § 101, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Verdun, Treaty of, § 82, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vergerius, § 134, 1; 139, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vermilius, Pet. Mart., § 139, 5, 24.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Veronica, § 18, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Versailles, Edict of, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_5'>165, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vespers, Sicilian, § 96, 22.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vestibulum</foreign>, § 60, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vestments, Ecclest., § 59, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Veuillot, § <ref target='Section_188_Para_1'>188, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_203_Para_3'>203, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Viaticum</foreign>, § 104, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vicelinus, § 93, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victor I., § 33, 3, 4; 37, 2; 40, 2; 41, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victor II., § 96, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   III., § 96, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   IV., § 96, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Vita, § 48, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Emmanuel I., § <ref target='Section_204_Para_1'>204, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       "    II., § <ref target='Section_185_Para_3'>185, 3</ref>; 204, <ref target='Section_204_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_204_Para_2'>2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victor, St., Monastery of, § 102, 4, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victorinus, Marius, § 47, 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Pettau, § 31, 12; 33, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victorius, § 56, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vienna, Congress of, § <ref target='Section_192_Para_3'>192, 3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Peace of, § 139, 40.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vienne, Council of, § 110, 2; 112, 1, 2, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vigilantius, § 62, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vigilius, § 46, 9; 52, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vigils, § 35; 56, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vikings, § 93, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Villegagnon, § 143, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vilmar, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_14'>182, 14</ref>; <ref target='Section_194_Para_4'>194, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vincent of Beauvais, § 99, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vincent Ferrari, § 115, 2; 110, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Lerins, § 47, 21; 53, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    de Paula, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vinci, Leon. da, § 115, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vinet, § 129, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Viret, § 138, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgilius of Salzburg, § 78, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgins, The 11,000, § 104, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Visigoths, § 76, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Visitation, Articles of, § 141, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vita quadragesimalis</foreign>, § 112, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitalis Ordenicus, § 5, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitus, § 46, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitringa, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vladimir, § 73, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vladislaw, § 119, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      IV., § <ref target='Section_153_Para_7'>153, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Voetius, § 161, <ref target='Section_161_Para_4'>4</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>7</ref>; <ref target='Section_162_Para_4'>162, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_163_Para_7'>163, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volkmann, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_1'>169, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Voltaire, § 105, 5, 14, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vorstius, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_2'>161, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vossius, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vulgate, § 59, 1; 136, 4; 149, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waddington, § 203, <ref target='Section_203_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_203_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wafers, § 104, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wagner, Rich., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_10'>174, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wala, § 82, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walafrid Strabo, § 90, 4; 91, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walch, J. G., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Fr., § <ref target='Section_171_Para_8'>171, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waldemar I., § 93, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    II., § 93, 12.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waldensians, § 108, 10-12; 119, 9, 10; 139, 25; <ref target='Section_153_Para_5'>153, 5</ref>; <ref target='Section_204_Para_4'>204, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waldrade, § 82, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wallace, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_17'>211, 17</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walter of Habenichts, § 94, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   "  St. Victor, § 102, 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   v. d. Vogelweide, § 105, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Walther, Hans, § 142, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Mich., § <ref target='Section_159_Para_4'>159, 4</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"     Dr., § 208, <ref target='Section_208_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_208_Para_3'>3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='543'/><anchor id='Pg543'/>

<lg>
<l>Walton, Brian, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_6'>161, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warburton, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ward, § <ref target='Section_156_Para_8'>156, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warnefried, § 90, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wartburg, § 123, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Watts, Isaac, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wazo of Liege, § 109.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wearmouth, § 85, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weber, F. W., § <ref target='Section_174_Para_6'>174, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wecelinus, § 95, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wechabites, § 65, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wegelin, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wegscheider, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_2'>182, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weigel, Val., § 146, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weingarten, § 5, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weiss, Bern., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_11'>182, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weissel, § <ref target='Section_160_Para_3'>160, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wellhausen, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_18'>182, 18</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wends, § 93, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wendelin, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wenilo, § 91, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wenzel, § 119, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wenzeslaw, § 93, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wertheimer Bible, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_2'>171, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wesel, John of, § 119, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wesley, § 169, <ref target='Section_169_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_169_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wessel, § 119, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westeräs, Diet of, § 139, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westminster Assembly, § <ref target='Section_155_Para_1'>155, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westphal, § 141, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westphalia, Peace of, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Reform, § 133, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wette, de, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_3'>182, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wetterau, § <ref target='Section_170'>170</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wettstein, § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitaker, § 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitefield, § 169, <ref target='Section_169_Para_3'>3</ref>, <ref target='Section_169_Para_4'>4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitgift, § 143, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wibert, § 96, 6, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wichern, § <ref target='Section_183_Para_1'>183, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiclif, § 119, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wido of Milan, § 97, 5.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wied, H. v., § 133, 5; 135, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wieland, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_11'>171, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wigand, § 141, 10.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilberforce, § <ref target='Section_184'>184</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilfrid, § 77, 6; 78, 3; 83, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilgard, § 100.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilibrord, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willehad, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>William of St. Amour, § 103, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Aquitaine, § 98, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Champeaux, § 101, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Conches, § 102, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    the Conqueror, § 96, 8, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Durandus, § 113, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Modena, § 93, 13.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Nogaret, § 110, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    "  Occam, § 112, 2; 113, 3; 118, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>William Rufus, § 96, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    Ruysbroek, § 93, 15.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    of Thierry, § 102, 2, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    " Tyre, § 94, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    " Bavaria, § 135, 8; 136, 2, 6; 151, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>William IV., V., of Hesse, § <ref target='Section_154_Para_1'>154, 1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    I. of Orange, § 129, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"    III. of Orange, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_6'>153, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_155_Para_3'>155, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>William I., German Emperor, § <ref target='Section_193'>193</ref>; <ref target='Section_197'>197</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Williams, John, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_7'>184, 7</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      Roger, § <ref target='Section_162_Para_2'>162, 2</ref>; <ref target='Section_163_Para_3'>163, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Willigis, § 96, 2; 97, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilsnack, Mirac, host of, § 119, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilson, § <ref target='Section_172_Para_5'>172, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winckelmann, § <ref target='Section_165_Para_6'>165, 6</ref>; <ref target='Section_174_Para_9'>174, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Windesheim, § 112, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Windthorst, § 197, <ref target='Section_197_Para_1'>1</ref>, <ref target='Section_197_Para_6'>6</ref>; <ref target='Section_188_Para_3'>188, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winer, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_4'>182, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winfrid, § 78, 4-8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wion, § 149, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiseman, § <ref target='Section_202_Para_11'>202, 11</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wishart, § 139, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wislicenus, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witch Hammer, § 117, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Process, § 117, 4.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='544'/><anchor id='Pg544'/>

<lg>
<l>Witsius, § <ref target='Section_161_Para_7'>161, 7</ref>; <ref target='Section_169_Para_4'>169, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wittenberg, § 120, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Catech., § 141, 10.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Concord., § 133, 8.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Sketch of Reform, § 135, 13.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witzel, § 137, 8; 149, 15.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolf, J. Chr., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolfenbüttel Fragments, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_6'>171, 6</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolff, Chr. v., § <ref target='Section_167_Para_4'>167, 4</ref>; <ref target='Section_171_Para_10'>171, 10</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolfgang, William, of Palatine Neuburg, § 153,1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolfram of Eschenb., § 105, 6.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wöllner, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_5'>171, 5</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolmar, Melch., § 138, 2, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wolsey, § 120, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woltersdorf, § 167, <ref target='Section_167_Para_6'>6</ref>, <ref target='Section_167_Para_8'>8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woolston, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_1'>171, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worms Edict, § 123, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Concordat, § 96, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Consultation, § 137, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Relig. Confer., § 135, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wratislaw, § 79, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wulflaich, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wulfram, § 78, 3.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Württemberg, § 133, 3; 193, <ref target='Section_193_Para_5'>5</ref>, <ref target='Section_193_Para_6'>6</ref>; <ref target='Section_197_Para_14'>197, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Würzburg, Bish. Congress, § <ref target='Section_192_Para_4'>192, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wyttenbach, Dan., § <ref target='Section_169_Para_6'>169, 6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"       Thomas, § 130, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xavier, § 119, 8; 150, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenaias, § 59, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ximenes, § 117, 2; 118, 7; 120, 8, 9.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Young, Brigham, § <ref target='Section_211_Para_12'>211, 12</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yvon, § <ref target='Section_163_Para_8'>163, 8</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zacharias, Pope, § 78, 5, 6; 82, 1.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"      of Anagni, § 67, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zapolya, § 139, 20.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Zelatores</foreign>, § 98, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zell, Matt., § 125, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeller, Ed., § <ref target='Section_182_Para_9'>182, 9</ref>; <ref target='Section_199_Para_4'>199, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Zelus domus Dei</foreign>, § <ref target='Section_153_Para_2'>153, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeno, Philos., § 8, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   Emp., § 52, 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>"   of Verona, § 47, 14.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zenobia, § 32, 8.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zephyrinus, § 33, 3, 5; 41, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeschwitz, § <ref target='Section_182_Para_14'>182, 14</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ziegenbalg, § <ref target='Section_167_Para_9'>167, 9</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zillerthal, § 198.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimmermann, § <ref target='Section_178_Para_1'>178, 1</ref>; <ref target='Section_182_Para_2'>182, 2</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zinzendorf, § <ref target='Section_168'>168</ref>; 170, <ref target='Section_170_Para_2'>2</ref>, <ref target='Section_170_Para_3'>3</ref>; <ref target='Section_171_Para_3'>171, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zionites, § <ref target='Section_170_Para_4'>170, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ziska, § 119, 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zollikofer, § <ref target='Section_171_Para_7'>171, 7</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zosimus, § 46, 5; 53, 4.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zschokke, § <ref target='Section_176_Para_1'>176, 1</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zulu Kaffres, § <ref target='Section_184_Para_3'>184, 3</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zürich, § 130, 2; <ref target='Section_199_Para_4'>199, 4</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zwick, § 143, 2.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zwickau, Prophets of, § 121, 1.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zwingli, § 130; 131, 1; 132, 4.</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
